          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to " Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*
This etext was transcribed by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk; proofing by Andy and his wife.
The edition used was the 1922 Macmillan and Co. one.
THE BELDONALD HOLBEIN
by Henry James
CHAPTER I
Mrs. Munden had not yet been to my studio on so good a pretext as when she
first intimated that it would be quite open to me--should I only care, as
she called it, to throw the handkerchief--to paint her beautiful sister-in-
law.  I needn't go here more than is essential into the question of Mrs.
Munden, who would really, by the way, be a story in herself.  She has a
manner of her own of putting things, and some of those she has put to me--!
Her implication was that Lady Beldonald hadn't only seen and admired
certain examples of my work, but had literally been prepossessed in favour
of the painter's "personality."  Had I been struck with this sketch I might
easily have imagined her ladyship was throwing me the handkerchief.  "She
hasn't done," my visitor said, "what she ought."
"Do you mean she has done what she oughtn't?"
"Nothing horrid--ah dear no."  And something in Mrs. Munden's tone, with
the way she appeared to muse a moment, even suggested to me that what she
"oughtn't" was perhaps what Lady Beldonald had too much neglected.  "She
hasn't got on."
"What's the matter with her?"
"Well, to begin with, she's American."
"But I thought that was the way of ways to get on."
"It's one of them.  But it's one of the ways of being awfully out of it
too.  There are so many!"
"So many Americans?" I asked.
"Yes, plenty of THEM," Mrs. Munden sighed.  "So many ways, I mean, of being
one."
"But if your sister-in-law's way is to be beautiful--?"
"Oh there are different ways of that too."
"And she hasn't taken the right way?"
"Well," my friend returned as if it were rather difficult to express, "she
hasn't done with it--"
"I see," I laughed; "what she oughtn't!"
Mrs. Munden in a manner corrected me, but it WAS difficult to express.  "My
brother at all events was certainly selfish.  Till he died she was almost
never in London; they wintered, year after year, for what he supposed to be
his health--which it didn't help, since he was so much too soon to meet his
end--in the south of France and in the dullest holes he could pick out, and
when they came back to England he always kept her in the country.  I must
say for her that she always behaved beautifully.  Since his death she has
been more in London, but on a stupidly unsuccessful footing.  I don't think
she quite understands.  She hasn't what I should call a life.  It may be of
course that she doesn't want one.  That's just what I can't exactly find
out.  I can't make out how much she knows."
"I can easily make out," I returned with hilarity, "how much YOU do!"
"Well, you're very horrid.  Perhaps she's too old."
"Too old for what?" I persisted.
"For anything.  Of course she's no longer even a little young; only
preserved--oh but preserved, like bottled fruit, in syrup!  I want to help
her if only because she gets on my nerves, and I really think the way of it
would be just the right thing of yours at the Academy and on the line."
"But suppose," I threw out, "she should give on my nerves?"
"Oh she will.  But isn't that all in the day's work, and don't great
beauties always--?"
"YOU don't," I interrupted; but I at any rate saw Lady Beldonald later on--
the day came when her kinswoman brought her, and then I saw how her life
must have its centre in her own idea of her appearance.  Nothing else about
her mattered--one knew her all when one knew that.  She's indeed in one
particular, I think, sole of her kind--a person whom vanity has had the odd
effect of keeping positively safe and sound.  This passion is supposed
surely, for the most part, to be a principle of perversion and of injury,
leading astray those who listen to it and landing them sooner or later in
this or that complication; but it has landed her ladyship nowhere whatever-
-it has kept her from the first moment of full consciousness, one feels,
exactly in the same place.  It has protected her from every danger, has
made her absolutely proper and prim.  If she's "preserved," as Mrs. Munden
originally described her to me, it's her vanity that has beautifully done
it--putting her years ago in a plate-glass case and closing up the
receptacle against every breath of air.  How shouldn't she be preserved
when you might smash your knuckles on this transparency before you could
crack it?  And she is--oh amazingly!  Preservation is scarce the word for
the rare condition of her surface.  She looks NATURALLY new, as if she took
out every night her large lovely varnished eyes and put them in water.  The
thing was to paint her, I perceived, in the glass case--a most tempting
attaching feat; render to the full the shining interposing plate and the
general show-window effect.
It was agreed, though it wasn't quite arranged, that she should sit to me.
If it wasn't quite arranged this was because, as I was made to understand
from an early stage, the conditions from our start must be such as should
exclude all elements of disturbance, such, in a word, as she herself should
judge absolutely favourable.  And it seemed that these conditions were
easily imperilled.  Suddenly, for instance, at a moment when I was
expecting her to meet an appointment--the first--that I had proposed, I
received a hurried visit from Mrs. Munden, who came on her behalf to let me
know that the season happened just not to be propitious and that our friend
couldn't be quite sure, to the hour, when it would again become so.  She
felt nothing would make it so but a total absence of worry.
"Oh a 'total absence,'" I said, "is a large order!  We live in a worrying
world."
"Yes; and she feels exactly that--more than you'd think.  It's in fact just
why she mustn't have, as she has now, a particular distress on at the very
moment.  She wants of course to look her best, and such things tell on her
appearance."
I shook my head.  "Nothing tells on her appearance.  Nothing reaches it in
any way; nothing gets AT it.  However, I can understand her anxiety.  But
what's her particular distress?"
"Why the illness of Miss Dadd."
"And who in the world's Miss Dadd?"
"Her most intimate friend and constant companion--the lady who was with us
here that first day."
"Oh the little round black woman who gurgled with admiration?"
"None other.  But she was taken ill last week, and it may very well be that
she'll gurgle no more.  She was very bad yesterday and is no better to-day,
and Nina's much upset.  If anything happens to Miss Dadd she'll have to get
another, and, though she has had two or three before, that won't be so
easy."
"Two or three Miss Dadds? is it possible?  And still wanting another!"  I
recalled the poor lady completely now.  "No; I shouldn't indeed think it
would be easy to get another.  But why is a succession of them necessary to
Lady Beldonald's existence?"
"Can't you guess?"  Mrs. Munden looked deep, yet impatient.  "They help."
"Help what?  Help whom?"
"Why every one.  You and me for instance.  To do what?  Why to think Nina
beautiful.  She has them for that purpose; they serve as foils, as accents
serve on syllables, as terms of comparison.  They make her 'stand out.'
It's an effect of contrast that must be familiar to you artists; it's what
a woman does when she puts a band of black velvet under a pearl ornament
that may, require, as she thinks, a little showing off."
I wondered.  "Do you mean she always has them black?"
"Dear no; I've seen them blue, green, yellow.  They may be what they like,
so long as they're always one other thing."
"Hideous?"
Mrs. Munden made a mouth for it.  "Hideous is too much to say; she doesn't
really require them as bad as that.  But consistently, cheerfully, loyally
plain.  It's really a most happy relation.  She loves them for it."
"And for what do they love HER?"
"Why just for the amiability that they produce in her.  Then also for their
'home.'  It's a career for them."
"I see.  But if that's the case," I asked, "why are they so difficult to
find?"
"Oh they must be safe; it's all in that:  her being able to depend on them
to keep to the terms of the bargain and never have moments of rising--as
even the ugliest woman will now and then (say when she's in love)--superior
to themselves."
I turned it over.  "Then if they can't inspire passions the poor things
mayn't even at least feel them?"
"She distinctly deprecates it.  That's why such a man as you may be after
all a complication."
I continued to brood.  "You're very sure Miss Dadd's ailment isn't an
affection that, being smothered, has struck in?"  My joke, however, wasn't
well timed, for I afterwards learned that the unfortunate lady's state had
been, even while I spoke, such as to forbid all hope.  The worst symptoms
had appeared; she was destined not to recover; and a week later I heard
from Mrs. Munden that she would in fact "gurgle" no more.
CHAPTER II
All this had been for Lady Beldonald an agitation so great that access to
her apartment was denied for a time even to her sister-in-law.  It was much
more out of the question of course that she should unveil her face to a
person of my special business with it; so that the question of the portrait
was by common consent left to depend on that of the installation of a
successor to her late companion.  Such a successor, I gathered from Mrs.
Munden, widowed childless and lonely, as well as inapt for the minor
offices, she had absolutely to have; a more or less humble alter ago to
deal with the servants, keep the accounts, make the tea and watch the
window-blinds.  Nothing seemed more natural than that she should marry
again, and obviously that might come; yet the predecessors of Miss Dadd had
been contemporaneous with a first husband, so that others formed in her
image might be contemporaneous with a second.  I was much occupied in those
months at any rate, and these questions and their ramifications losing
themselves for a while to my view, I was only brought back to them by Mrs.
Munden's arrival one day with the news that we were all right again--her
sister-in-law was once more "suited."  A certain Mrs. Brash, an American
relative whom she hadn't seen for years, but with whom she had continued to
communicate, was to come out to her immediately; and this person, it
appeared, could be quite trusted to meet the conditions.  She was ugly--
ugly enough, without abuse of it, and was unlimitedly good.  The position
offered her by Lady Beldonald was moreover exactly what she needed; widowed
also, after many troubles and reverses, with her fortune of the smallest,
and her various children either buried or placed about, she had never had
time or means to visit England, and would really be grateful in her
declining years for the new experience and the pleasant light work involved
in her cousin's hospitality.  They had been much together early in life and
Lady Beldonald was immensely fond of her--would in fact have tried to get
hold of her before hadn't Mrs. Brash been always in bondage to family
duties, to the variety of her tribulations.  I daresay I laughed at my
friend's use of the term "position"--the position, one might call it, of a
candlestick or a sign-post, and I daresay I must have asked if the special
service the poor lady was to render had been made clear to her.  Mrs.
Munden left me in any case with the rather droll image of her faring forth
across the sea quite consciously and resignedly to perform it.
The point of the communication had however been that my sitter was again
looking up and would doubtless, on the arrival and due initiation of Mrs.
Brash, be in form really to wait on me.  The situation must further, to my
knowledge, have developed happily, for I arranged with Mrs. Munden that our
friend, now all ready to begin, but wanting first just to see the things I
had most recently done, should come once more, as a final preliminary, to
my studio.  A good foreign friend of mine, a French painter, Paul Outreau,
was at the moment in London, and I had proposed, as he was much interested
in types, to get together for his amusement a small afternoon party.  Every
one came, my big room was full, there was music and a modest spread; and
I've not forgotten the light of admiration in Outreau's expressive face as
at the end of half an hour he came up to me in his enthusiasm.  "Bonte
divine, mon cher--que cette vieille est donc belle!"
I had tried to collect all the beauty I could, and also all the youth, so
that for a moment I was at a loss.  I had talked to many people and
provided for the music, and there were figures in the crowd that were still
lost to me.  "What old woman do you mean?"
"I don't know her name--she was over by the door a moment ago.  I asked
somebody and was told, I think, that she's American."
I looked about and saw one of my guests attach a pair of fine eyes to
Outreau very much as if she knew he must be talking of her.  "Oh Lady
Beldonald!  Yes, she's handsome; but the great point about her is that she
has been 'put up' to keep, and that she wouldn't be flattered if she knew
you spoke of her as old.  A box of sardines is 'old' only after it has been
opened, Lady Beldonald never has yet been--but I'm going to do it."  I
joked, but I was somewhat disappointed.  It was a type that, with his
unerring sense for the banal, I shouldn't have expected Outreau to pick
out.
"You're going to paint her?  But, my dear man, she is painted--and as
neither you nor I can do it.  Ou est-elle donc?  He had lost her, and I saw
I had made a mistake.  She's the greatest of all the great Holbeins."
I was relieved.  "Ah then not Lady Beldonald!  But do I possess a Holbein
of ANY price unawares?"
"There she is--there she is!  Dear, dear, dear, what a head!"  And I saw
whom he meant--and what:  a small old lady in a black dress and a black
bonnet, both relieved with a little white, who had evidently just changed,
her place to reach a corner from which more of the room and of the scene
was presented to her.  She appeared unnoticed and unknown, and I
immediately recognised that some other guest must have brought her and, for
want of opportunity, had as yet to call my attention to her.  But two
things, simultaneously with this and with each other, struck me with force;
one of them the truth of Outreau's description of her, the other the fact
that the person bringing her could only have been Lady Beldonald.  She WAS
a Holbein--of the first water; yet she was also Mrs. Brash, the imported
"foil," the indispensable accent," the successor to the dreary Miss Dadd!
By the time I had put these things together--Outreau's "American" having
helped me--I was in just such full possession of her face as I had found
myself, on the other first occasion, of that of her patroness.  Only with
so different a consequence.  I couldn't look at her enough, and I stared
and stared till I became aware she might have fancied me challenging her as
a person unpresented.  "All the same," Outreau went on, equally held,
"c'est une tete a faire.  If I were only staying long enough for a crack at
her!  But I tell you what and he seized my arm--"bring her over!"
"Over?"
"To Paris.  She'd have a succes fou."
"Ah thanks, my dear fellow," I was now quite in a position to say; "she's
the handsomest thing in London, and"--for what I might do with her was
already before me with intensity--"I propose to keep her to myself."  It
was before me with intensity, in the light of Mrs. Brash's distant
perfection of a little white old face, in which every wrinkle was the touch
of a master; but something else, I suddenly felt, was not less so, for Lady
Beldonald, in the other quarter, and though she couldn't have made out the
subject of our notice, continued to fix us, and her eyes had the challenge
of those of the woman of consequence who has missed something.  A moment
later I was close to her, apologising first for not having been more on the
spot at her arrival, but saying in the next breath uncontrollably:  "Why my
dear lady, it's a Holbein!"
"A Holbein?  What?"
"Why the wonderful sharp old face so extraordinarily, consummately drawn--
in the frame of black velvet.  That of Mrs. Brash, I mean--isn't it her
name?--your companion."
This was the beginning of a most odd matter--the essence of my anecdote;
and I think the very first note of the oddity must have sounded for me in
the tone in which her ladyship spoke after giving me a silent look.  It
seemed to come to me out of a distance immeasurably removed from Holbein.
"Mrs. Brash isn't my 'companion' in the sense you appear to mean.  She's my
rather near relation and a very dear old friend.  I love her--and you must
know her."
"Know her?  Rather!  Why to see her is to want on the spot to 'go' for her.
She also must sit for me,"
"SHE?  Louisa Brash?"  If Lady Beldonald had the theory that her beauty
directly showed it when things weren't well with her, this impression,
which the fixed sweetness of her serenity had hitherto struck me by no
means as justifying, gave me now my first glimpse of its grounds.  It was
as if I had never before seen her face invaded by anything I should have
called an expression.  This expression moreover was of the faintest--was
like the effect produced on a surface by an agitation both deep within and
as yet much confused.  "Have you told her so?" she then quickly asked, as
if to soften the sound of her surprise.
"Dear no, I've but just noticed her--Outreau, a moment ago put me on her.
But we're both so taken, and he also wants--"
"To PAINT her?" Lady Beldonald uncontrollably murmured.
"Don't be afraid we shall fight for her," I returned with a laugh for this
tone.  Mrs. Brash was still where I could see her without appearing to
stare, and she mightn't have seen I was looking at her, though her
protectress, I'm afraid, could scarce have failed of that certainty.  "We
must each take our turn, and at any rate she's a wonderful thing, so that
if you'll let her go to Paris Outreau promises her there--"
"THERE?" my companion gasped.
"A career bigger still than among us, as he considers we haven't half their
eye.  He guarantees her a succes fou."
She couldn't get over it.  "Louisa Brash?  In Paris?"
"They do see," I went on, "more than we and they live extraordinarily,
don't you know, in that.  But she'll do something here too."
"And what will she do?"
If frankly now I couldn't help giving Mrs. Brash a longer look, so after it
I could as little resist sounding my converser.  "You'll see.  Only give
her time."
She said nothing during the moment in which she met my eyes; but then:
"Time, it seems to me, is exactly what you and your friend want.  If you
haven't talked with her--"
"We haven't seen her?  Oh we see bang off--with a click like a steel
spring.  It's our trade, it's our life, and we should be donkeys if we made
mistakes.  That's the way I saw you yourself, my lady, if I may say so;
that's the way, with a long pin straight through your body, I've got you.
And just so I've got HER!"
All this, for reasons, had brought my guest to her feet; but her eyes had
while we talked never once followed the direction of mine.  "You call her a
Holbein?"
"Outreau did, and I of course immediately recognised it.  Don't you?  She
brings the old boy to life!  It's just as I should call you a Titian.  You
bring HIM to life."
She couldn't be said to relax, because she couldn't be said to have
hardened; but something at any rate on this took place in her--something
indeed quite disconnected from what I would have called her.  "Don't you
understand that she has always been supposed--?"  It had the ring of
impatience; nevertheless it stopped short on a scruple.
I knew what it was, however, well enough to say it for her if she
preferred.  "To be nothing whatever to look at?  To be unfortunately plain-
-or even if you like repulsively ugly?  Oh yes, I understand it perfectly,
just as I understand--I have to as a part of my trade--many other forms of
stupidity.  It's nothing new to one that ninety-nine people out of a
hundred have no eyes, no sense, no taste.  There are whole communities
impenetrably sealed.  I don't say your friend's a person to make the men
turn round in Regent Street.  But it adds to the joy of the few who do see
that they have it so much to themselves.  Where in the world can she have
lived?  You must tell me all about that--or rather, if she'll be so good,
SHE must."
"You mean then to speak to her--?"
I wondered as she pulled up again.  "Of her beauty?"
"Her beauty!" cried Lady Beldonald so loud that two or three persons looked
round.
"Ah with every precaution of respect  I declared in a much lower tone.  But
her back was by this time turned to me, and in the movement, as it were,
one of the strangest little dramas I've ever known was well launched.
CHAPTER III
It was a drama of small smothered intensely private things, and I knew of
but one other person in the secret; yet that person and I found it
exquisitely susceptible of notation, followed it with an interest the
mutual communication of which did much for our enjoyment, and were present
with emotion at its touching catastrophe.  The small case--for so small a
case--had made a great stride even before my little party separated, and in
fact within the next ten minutes.
In that space of time two things had happened one of which was that I made
the acquaintance of Mrs. Brash; and the other that Mrs. Munden reached me,
cleaving the crowd, with one of her usual pieces of news.  What she had to
impart was that, on her having just before asked Nina if the conditions of
our sitting had been arranged with me, Nina had replied, with something
like perversity, that she didn't propose to arrange them, that the whole
affair was "off" again and that she preferred not to be further beset for
the present.  The question for Mrs. Munden was naturally what had happened
and whether I understood.  Oh I understood perfectly, and what I at first
most understood was that even when I had brought in the name of Mrs. Brash
intelligence wasn't yet in Mrs. Munden.  She was quite as surprised as Lady
Beldonald had been on hearing of the esteem in which I held Mrs. Brash's
appearance.  She was stupefied at learning that I had just in my ardour
proposed to its proprietress to sit to me.  Only she came round promptly--
which Lady Beldonald really never did.  Mrs. Munden was in fact wonderful;
for when I had given her quickly "Why she's a Holbein, you know,
absolutely," she took it up, after a first fine vacancy, with an immediate
abysmal "Oh IS she?" that, as a piece of social gymnastics, did her the
greatest honour; and she was in fact the first in London to spread the
tidings.  For a face--about it was magnificent.  But she was also the
first, I must add, to see what would really happen--though this she put
before me only a week or two later.  It will kill her, my dear--that's what
it will do
She meant neither more nor less than that it would kill Lady Beldonald if I
were to paint Mrs. Brash; for at this lurid light had we arrived in so
short a space of time.  It was for me to decide whether my aesthetic need
of giving life to my idea was such as to justify me in destroying it in a
woman after all in most eyes so beautiful.  The situation was indeed
sufficiently queer; for it remained to be seen what I should positively
gain by giving up Mrs. Brash.  I appeared to have 'in any case lost Lady
Beldonald, now too "upset"--it was always Mrs. Munden's word about her and,
as I inferred, her own about herself--to meet me again on our previous
footing.  The only thing, I of course soon saw, was to temporise to drop
the whole question for the present and yet so far as possible keep each of
the pair in view.  I may as well say at once that this plan and this
process gave their principal interest to the next several months.  Mrs.
Brash had turned up, if I remember, early in the new year, and her little
wonderful career was in our particular circle one of the features of the
following season.  It was at all events for myself the most attaching; it's
not my fault if I am so put together as often to find more life in
situations obscure and subject to interpretation than in the gross rattle
of the foreground.  And there were all sorts of things, things touching,
amusing, mystifying--and above all such an instance as I had never yet met-
-in this funny little fortune of the useful American cousin.  Mrs. Munden
was promptly at one with me as to the rarity and, to a near and human view,
the beauty and interest of the position.  We had neither of us ever before
seen that degree and that special sort of personal success come to a woman
for the first time so late in life.  I found it an example of poetic, of
absolutely retributive justice; so that my desire grew great to work it, as
we say, on those lines.  I had seen it all from the original moment at my
studio; the poor lady had never known an hour's appreciation--which
moreover, in perfect good faith, she had never missed.  The very first
thing I did after inducing so unintentionally the resentful retreat of her
protectress had been to go straight over to her and say almost without
preliminaries that I should hold myself immeasurably obliged for a few
patient sittings.  What I thus came face to face with was, on the instant,
her whole unenlightened past and the full, if foreshortened, revelation of
what among us all was now unfailingly in store for her.  To turn the handle
and start that tune came to me on the spot as a temptation.  Here was a
poor lady who had waited for the approach of old age to find out what she
was worth.  Here was a benighted being to whom it was to be disclosed in
her fifty-seventh year--I was to make that out--that she had something that
might pass for a face.  She looked much more than her age, and was fairly
frightened--as if I had been trying on her some possibly heartless London
trick--when she had taken in my appeal.  That showed me in what an air she
had lived and--as I should have been tempted to put it had I spoken out--
among what children of darkness.  Later on I did them more justice; saw
more that her wonderful points must have been points largely the fruit of
time, and even that possibly she might never in all her life have looked so
well as at this particular moment.  It might have been that if her hour had
struck I just happened to be present at the striking.  What had occurred,
all the same, was at the worst a notable comedy.
The famous "irony of fate" takes many forms, but I had never yet seen it
take quite this one.  She had been "had over" on an understanding, and she
wasn't playing fair.  She had broken the law of her ugliness and had turned
beautiful on the hands of her employer.  More interesting even perhaps than
a view of the conscious triumph that this might prepare for her, and of
which, had I doubted of my own judgement, I could still take Outreau's fine
start as the full guarantee--more interesting was the question of the
process by which such a history could get itself enacted.  The curious
thing was that all the while the reasons of her having passed for plain--
the reasons for Lady Beldonald's fond calculation, which they quite
justified--were written large in her face, so large that it was easy to
understand them as the only ones she herself had ever read.  What was it
then that actually made the old stale sentence mean something so
different?--into what new combinations, what extraordinary language,
unknown but understood at a glance, had time and life translated it?  The
only thing to be said was that time and life were artists who beat us all,
working with recipes and secrets we could never find out.  I really ought
to have, like a lecturer or a showman, a chart or a blackboard to present
properly the relation, in the wonderful old tender battered blanched face,
between the original elements and the exquisite final it style."  I could
do it with chalks, but I can scarcely do it with words.  However, the thing
was, for any artist who respected himself, to FEEL it--which I abundantly
did; and then not to conceal from HER I felt it--which I neglected as
little.  But she was really, to do her complete justice, the last to
