3. To the note you carry in writing to the party complained of, you
are entitled to a written answer, which will be directed to your
principal and will be delivered to you by his adversary's friend. If
this be not written in the style of a gentleman, refuse to receive it,
and assign your reason for such refusal. If there be a question made
as to the character of the note, require the second presenting it to
you, who considers it respectful, to endorse upon it these words: "I
consider the note of my friend respectful, and would not have been the
bearer of it, if I believed otherwise."
4. If the party called on, refuses to receive the note you bear, you
are entitled to demand a reason for such refusal. If he refuses to
give you any reason, and persists in such refusal, he treats, not only
your friend, but yourself, with indignity, and you must then make
yourself the actor, by sending a respectful note, requiring a proper
explanation of the course he has pursued towards you and your friend;
and if he still adheres to his determination, you are to challenge or
post him.
5. If the person to whom you deliver the note of your friend, declines
meeting him on the ground of inequality, you are bound to tender
yourself in his stead, by a note directed to him from yourself; and if
he refuses to meet you, you are to post him.
6. In all cases of the substitution of the second for the principal,
the seconds should interpose and adjust the matter, if the party
substituting avows he does not make the quarrel of his principal his
own. The true reason for substitution, is the supposed insult of
imputing to you the like inequality which if charged upon your friend,
and when the contrary is declared, there should be no fight, for
individuals may well differ in their estimate of an individual's
character and standing in society. In case of substitution and a
satisfactory arrangement, you are then to inform your friend of all
the facts, whose duty it will be to post in person.
7. If the party, to whom you present a note, employ a son, father or
brother, as a second, you may decline acting with either on the ground
of consanguinity.
8. If a minor wishes you to take a note to an adult, decline doing so,
on the ground of his minority. But if the adult complained of, had
made a companion of the minor in society, you may bear the note.
9. When an accommodation is tendered, never require too much; and if
the party offering the amende honorable, wishes to give a reason for
his conduct in the matter, do not, unless offensive to your friend,
refuse to receive it; by so doing you may heal the breach more
effectually.
10. If a stranger wishes you to bear a note for him, be well satisfied
before you do so, that he is on an equality with you; and in
presenting the note state to the party the relationship you stand
towards him, and what you know and believe about him; for strangers
are entitled to redress for wrongs, as well as others, and the rules
of honor and hospitality should protect him.
CHAPTER II.
The Party Receiving a Note Before Challenge.
1. When a note is presented to you by an equal, receive it, and read
it, although you may suppose it to be from one you do not intend to
meet, because its requisites may be of a character which may readily
be complied with. But if the requirements of a note cannot be acceded
to, return it, through the medium of your friend, to the person who
handed it to you, with your reason for returning it.
2. If the note received be in abusive terms, object to its reception,
and return it for that reason; but if it be respectful, return an
answer of the same character, in which respond correctly and openly to
all interrogatories fairly propounded, and hand it to your friend,
who, it is presumed, you have consulted, and who has advised the
answer; direct it to the opposite party, and let it be delivered to
his friend.
3. You may refuse to receive a note, from a minor, (if you have not
made an associate of him); one that has been posted; one that has been
publicly disgraced without resenting it; one whose occupation is
unlawful; a man in his dotage and a lunatic. There may be other cases,
but the character of those enumerated will lead to a correct decision
upon those omitted.
If you receive a note from a stranger, you have a right to a
reasonable time to ascertain his standing in society, unless he is
fully vouched for by his friend.
4. If a party delays calling on you for a week or more, after the
supposed insult, and assigns no cause for the delay, if you require
it, you may double the time before you respond to him; for the wrong
cannot be considered aggravated; if borne patiently for some days, and
the time may have been used in preparation and practice.
Second's Duty of the Party Receiving a Note Before Challenge Sent.
1. When consulted by your friend, who has received a note requiring
explanation, inform him distinctly that he must be governed wholly by
you in the progress of the dispute. If he refuses, decline to act on
that ground.
2. Use your utmost efforts to allay all excitement which your
principal may labor under; search diligently into the origin of the
misunderstanding; for gentlemen seldom insult each other, unless they
labor under some misapprehension or mistake; and when you have
discovered the original ground or error, follow each movement to the
time of sending the note, and harmony will be restored.
3. When your principal refuses to do what you require of hi, decline
further acting on that ground, and inform the opposing second of your
withdrawal from the negotiation.
CHAPTER III.
Duty of Challenger and His Second Before Fighting.
1. After all efforts for a reconciliation are over, the party
aggrieved sends a challenge to his adversary, which is delivered to
his second.
2. Upon the acceptance of the challenge, the seconds make the
necessary arrangements for the meeting, in which each party is
entitled to a perfect equality. The old notion that the party
challenged, was authorized to name the time, place, distance and
weapon, has been long since exploded; nor would a man of chivalric
honor use such a right, if he possessed it. The time must e as soon as
practicable, the place such as had ordinarily been used where the
parties are, the distance usual, and the weapons that which is most
generally used, which, in this State, is the pistol.
3. If the challengee insist upon what is not usual in time, place,
distance and weapon, do not yield the point, and tender in writing
what is usual in each, and if he refuses to give satisfaction, then
your friend may post him.
4. If your friend be determined to fight and not post, you have the
right to withdraw. But if you continue to act, and have the right to
tender a still more deadly distance and weapon, and he must accept.
5. The usual distance is from ten to twenty paces, as may be agreed
on; and the seconds in measuring the ground, usually step three feet.
6. After all the arrangements are made, the seconds determine the
giving of the word and position, by lot; and he who gains has the
choice of the one or the other, selects whether it be the word or the
position, but he cannot have both.
CHAPTER IV.
Duty of Challengee and Second After Challenge Sent.
1. The challengee has no option when negotiation has ceased, but to
accept the challenge.
2. The second makes the necessary arrangements with the second of the
person challenging. The arrangements are detailed in the preceding
chapter.
CHAPTER V.
Duty of Principals and Seconds on the Ground.
1. The principals are to be respectful in meeting, and neither by look
or expression irritate each other. They are to be wholly passive,
being entirely under the guidance of their seconds.
2. When once posted, they are not to quit their positions under any
circumstances, without leave or direction of their seconds.
3. When the principals are posted, the second giving the word, must
tell them to stand firm until he repeats the giving of the word, in
the manner it will be given when the parties are at liberty to fire.
4. Each second has a loaded pistol, in order to enforce a fair combat
according to the rules agreed on; and if a principal fires before the
word or time agreed on, he is at liberty to fire at him, and if such
second's principal fall, it is his duty to do so.
5. If after a fire, either party be touched, the duel is to end; and
no second is excusable who permits a wounded friend to fight; and no
second who knows his duty, will permit his friend to fight a man
already hit. I am aware there have been many instances where a contest
has continued, not only after slight, but severe wounds, had been
received. In all such cases, I think the seconds are blamable.
6. If after an exchange of shots, neither party be hit, it is the duty
of the second of the challengee, to approach the second of the
challenger and say: "Our friends have exchanged shots, are you
satisfied, or is there any cause why the contest should be continued?"
If the meeting be of no serious cause of complaint, where the party
complaining had in no way been deeply injured, or grossly insulted,
the second of the party challenging should reply: "The point of honor
being settled, there can, I conceive, be no objection to a
reconciliation, and I propose that our principals meet on middle
ground, shake hands, and be friends." If this be acceded to by the
second of the challengee, the second of the party challenging, says:
"We have agreed that the present duel shall cease, the honor of each
of you is preserved, and you will meet on middle ground, shake hands
and be reconciled."
7. If the insult be of a serious character, it will be the duty of the
second of the challenger, to say, in reply to the second of the
challengee: "We have been deeply wronged, and if you are not disposed
to repair the injury, the contest must continue." And if the
challengee offers nothing by way of reparation, the fight continues
until one or the other of the principals is hit.
8. If in cases where the contest is ended by the seconds, as mentioned
in the sixth rule of this chapter, the parties refuse to meet and be
reconciled, it is the duty of the seconds to withdraw from the field,
informing their principals, that the contest must be continued under
the superintendence of other friends. But if one agrees to this
arrangement of the seconds, and the other does not, the second of the
disagreeing principal only withdraws.
9. If either principal on the ground refuses to fight or continue the
fight when required, it is the duty of his second to say to the other
second: "I have come upon the ground with a coward, and do tender you
my apology for an ignorance of his character; you are at liberty to
post him." The second, by such conduct, stands excused to the opposite
party.
10. When the duel is ended by a party being hit, it is the duty of the
second to the party so hit, to announce the fact to the second of the
party hitting, who will forthwith tender any assistance he can command
to the disabled principal. If the party challenging, hit the
challengee, it is his duty to say he is satisfied, and will leave the
ground. If the challenger be hit, upon the challengee being informed
of it, he should ask through his second, whether he is at liberty to
leave the ground which should be assented to.
CHAPTER VI.
Who Should Be on the Ground.
1. The principals, seconds, one surgeon and one assistant surgeon to
each principal; but the assistant surgeon may be dispensed with.
2. Any number of friends that the seconds agree on, may be present,
provided they do not come within the degrees of consanguinity
mentioned in the seventh rule of Chapter I.
3. Persons admitted on the ground, are carefully to abstain by word or
behavior, from any act that might be the least exceptionable; nor
should they stand near the principals or seconds, or hold
conversations with them.
CHAPTER VII.
Arms, and Manner of Loading and Presenting Them.
1. The arms used should be smooth-bore pistols, not exceeding nine
inches in length, with flint and steel. Percussion pistols may be
mutually used if agreed on, but to object on that account is lawful.
2. Each second informs the other when he is about to load, and invites
his presence, but the seconds rarely attend on such invitation, as
gentlemen may be safely trusted in the matter.
3. The second, in presenting the pistol to his friend, should never
put it in his pistol hand, but should place it in the other, which is
grasped midway the barrel, with muzzle pointing in the contrary way to
that which he is to fire, informing him that his pistol is loaded and
ready for use. Before the word is given, the principal grasps the butt
firmly in his pistol hand, and brings it round, with the muzzle
downward, to the fighting position.
4. The fighting position, is with the muzzle down and the barrel from
you; for although it may be agreed that you may hold your pistol with
the muzzle up, it may be objected to, as you can fire sooner from that
position, and consequently have a decided advantage, which ought not
to be claimed, and should not be granted.
CHAPTER VIII.
The Degrees of Insult, and How Compromised
1. The prevailing rule is, that words used in retort, although more
violent and disrespectful than those first used, will not
satisfy,--words being no satisfaction for words.
2. When words are used, and a blow given in return, the insult is
avenged; and if redress be sought, it must be from the person
receiving the blow.
3. When blows are given in the first instance and not returned, and
the person first striking, be badly beaten or otherwise, the party
first struck is to make the demand, for blows do not satisfy a blow.
4. Insults at a wine table, when the company are over-excited, must be
answered for; and if the party insulting have no recollection of the
insult, it is his duty to say so in writing, and negative the insult.
For instance, if the man say: "you are a liar and no gentleman," he
must, in addition to the plea of the want of recollection, say: "I
believe the party insulted to be a man of the strictest veracity and a
gentleman."
5. Intoxication is not a full excuse for insult, but it will greatly
palliate. If it was a full excuse, it might be well counterfeited to
wound feelings, or destroy character.
6. In all cases of intoxication, the seconds must use a sound
discretion under the above general rules.
7. Can every insult be compromised? is a mooted and vexed question. On
this subject, no rules can be given that will be satisfactory. The old
opinion, that a blow must require blood, is not of force. Blows may be
compromised in many cases. What those are, much depend on the seconds.
APPENDIX.
Since the above Code was in press, a friend has favored me with the
IRISH CODE OF HONOR, which I had never seen; and it is published as an
Appendix to it. One thing must be apparent to every reader, viz., the
marked amelioration of the rules that govern in duelling at the
present time. I am unable to say what code exists now in Ireland, but
I very much doubt whether it be of the same character which it bore in
1777. The American Quarterly Review for September, 1824, in a notice
of Sir Jonah Barrington's history of his own times, has published this
code; and followed it up with some remarks, which I have thought
proper to insert also. The grave reviewer has spoken of certain States
in terms so unlike a gentleman, that I would advise him to look at
home, and say whether he does not think that the manners of his own
countrymen, do not require great amendment? I am very sure, that the
citizens of the States so disrespectfully spoken of, would feel a deep
humiliation, to be compelled to exchange their urbanity of deportment,
for the uncouth incivility of the people of Massachusetts. Look at
their public journals, and you will find them, very generally, teeming
with abuse of private character, which would not be countenanced here.
The idea of New England becoming a school for manners, is about as
fanciful as Bolinbroke's "idea of a patriot king." I like their
fortiter in re, but utterly eschew their suaviter in modo.
"The practice of duelling and points of honor settled at Clonmell
summer assizes, 1777, by the gentleman delegates of Tipperary, Galway,
Mayo, Sligo and Roscommon, and prescribed for general adoption
throughout Ireland.
"Rule 1.--The first offence requires the apology, although the retort
may have been more offensive than the insult.--Example: A. tells B. he
is impertinent, &C.; B. retorts, that he lies; yet A. must make the
first apology, because he gave the first offence, and then, (after one
fire,) B. may explain away the retort by subsequent apology.
"Rule 2.--But if the parties would rather fight on: then, after two
shots each, (but in no case before,) B. may explain first, and A.
apologize afterward.
"Rule 3.--If a doubt exist who gave the first offence, the decision
rests with the seconds; if they won't decide or can't agree, the
matter must proceed to two shots, or a hit, if the challenger requires
it.
"Rule 4.--When the lie direct is the first offence, the aggressor must
either beg pardon in express terms; exchange tow shots previous to
apology; or three shots followed up by explanation; or fire on till a
severe hit be received by one party or the other.
"Rule 5.--As a blow is strictly prohibited under any circumstances
among gentlemen, no verbal apology can be received for such an insult;
the alternatives therefore are: the offender handing a can to the
injured party, to be used on his own back, at the same time begging
pardon; firing on until one or both is disabled; or exchanging three
shots, and then asking pardon without the proffer of the cane.
"If swords are used, the parties engage till one is well-blooded,
disabled or disarmed; or until, after receiving a wound, and blood
being drawn, the aggressor begs pardon.
"N.B. A disarm is considered the same as a disable; the disarmer may
(strictly) break his adversary's sword; but if it be the challenger
who is disarmed, it is considered ungenerous to do so.
"In case the challenged be disarmed and refuses to ask pardon or
atone, he must not be killed as formerly; but the challenger may lay
his sword on the aggressor's shoulder, than break the aggressor's
sword, and say, 'I spare your life!' The challenged can never revive
the quarrel, the challenger may.
"Rule 6.--If A. give B. the lie, and B. retorts by a blow, (being the
two greatest offences,) no reconciliation can take place till after
two discharges each, or a severe hit; after which, B. may beg A.'s
pardon for the blow, and then A. may explain simply for the lie;
because a blow is never allowable, and the offence of the lie
therefore merges in it. (See preceding rule.)
"N.B. Challenges for individual causes, may be reconciled on the
ground, after one shot. An explanation, or the slightest hit should be
sufficient in such cases, because no personal offence transpired.
"Rule 7.--But no apology can be received, in any case, after the
parties have actually taken their ground, without exchange of fires.
"Rule 8.--In the above case, no challenger is obliged to divulge the
cause of his challenge, (if private,) unless required by the
challenged to do so before their meeting.
"Rule 0.--All imputations of cheating at play, races, &c, to be
considered equivalent to a blow; but may be reconciled after one shot,
on admitting their falsehood, and begging pardon publicly.
"Rule 10.--Any insult to a lady under a gentleman's care or
protection, to be considered as, by one degree, a greater offence than
if given to the gentleman personally, and to be regulated accordingly.
"Rule 11.--Offences originating or accruing from the support of a
lady's reputation, to be considered as less unjustifiable than any
other of the same class, and as admitting of lighter apologies by the
aggressor; this to be determined by the circumstances of the case, but
always favorably to the lady.
"Rule 12.--In simple unpremeditated rencontres with the small sword or
couteau-de-chasse, the rule is, first draw, first sheathe; unless
blood be drawn: then both sheathe, and proceed to investigation.
"Rule 13.--No dumb-shooting, or firing in the air, admissible in any
case. The challenger ought not to have challenged without receiving
offence; and the challenged ought, if he gave offence, to have made an
apology before he came on the ground: therefore, children's play must
be dishonorable on one side or the other, and is accordingly
prohibited.
"Rule 14.--Seconds to be of equal rank in society with the principals
they attend, inasmuch as a second may choose or chance to become a
principal, and equality is indispensable.
"Rule 15.--Challenges are never to be delivered at night, unless the
party to be challenged intend leaving the place of offence before
morning; for it is desirable to avoid all hot-headed proceedings.
"Rule 16.--The challenged has the right to choose his own weapon,
unless the challenger gives his honor he is no swordsman; after which,
however, he cannot decline any second species of weapon proposed by
the challenged.
"Rule 17.--The challenged chooses his ground; the challenger chooses
his distance; the seconds fix the time and terms of firing.
"Rule 18.--The seconds load in presence of each other, unless they
give their mutual honors that they have charged smooth and single,
which should be held sufficient.
"Rule 19.--Firing may be regulated, first by signal; secondly, by word
of command; or, thirdly, at pleasure, as may be agreeable to the
parties. In the latter case, the parties may fire at their reasonable
leisure, but second presents and rests are strictly prohibited.
"Rule 20.--In all cases a miss-fire is equivalent to a shot, and a
snap or a non-cock is to be considered as a miss-fire.
"Rule 21.--Seconds are bound to attempt a reconciliation before the
meeting takes place, or after sufficient firing or hits, as specified.
"Rule 22.--Any wound sufficient to agitate the nerves and necessarily
make the hands shake, must end the business for that day.
"Rule 23.--If the cause of meeting be of such a nature that no apology
or explanation can or will be received, the challenged takes his
ground, and calls on the challenger to proceed as he chooses: in such
cases firing at pleasure is the usual practice, but may be varied by
agreement.
"Rule 24.--In slight cases, the second hands his principal but one
pistol; but in gross cases, two, holding another case ready charged in
reserve.
"Rule 25.--When seconds disagree, and resolve to exchange shots
themselves, it must be at the same time and at right angles with their
principals.
"If with swords, side by side, at five paces interval.
"N.B. All matters and doubts not herein mentioned, will be explained
and cleared up by application to the committee, who meet alternately
at Clonmell and Galway, at their quarter sessions, for the purpose.
"CROW RYAN, President."
"JAMES KEOG,
"AMBY BODKIN, Secretaries
ADDITIONAL GALWAY ARTICLES
"Rule 1.--No party can be allowed to bend his knee or cover his side
with his left hand; but may present at any level from the hip to the
eye.
"Rule 2.--One can neither advance nor retreat, if the ground be
measured. If the ground be unmeasured, either party may advance at
pleasure, even to touch muzzle; but neither can advance on his
adversary after the fire, unless his adversary step forward on him.
"The seconds stand responsible for this last rule being strictly
observed; bad cases have accrued from neglecting it."
This precise and enlightened digest was rendered necessary by the
multitude of quarrels that arouse without "sufficient dignified
provocation:" the point of honor men required a uniform government;
and the code thus formed was disseminated throughout the island, with
directions that it should b strictly observed by all gentlemen, and
kept in their pistol cases. The rules, with some others, were commonly
styled "the thirty-six commandments," and, according to the author,
have been much acted upon down to the present day. Tipperary and
Galway were the chief schools of duelling. We remember to have heard,
in travelling to the town of the former name in a stage coach, a
dispute between two Irish companions, on the point, which was the most
gentlemanly country in all Ireland--Tipperary or Galway? and both laid
great stress upon the relative duelling merits of those counties. By
the same criterion, Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia and South Carolina,
