          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to " Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*
THE DIARY OF A MAN OF FIFTY
Florence, April 5th, 1874.--They told me I should find Italy greatly 
changed; and in seven-and-twenty years there is room for changes.  
But to me everything is so perfectly the same that I seem to be 
living my youth over again; all the forgotten impressions of that 
enchanting time come back to me.  At the moment they were powerful 
enough; but they afterwards faded away.  What in the world became of 
them?  Whatever becomes of such things, in the long intervals of 
consciousness?  Where do they hide themselves away? in what unvisited 
cupboards and crannies of our being do they preserve themselves?  
They are like the lines of a letter written in sympathetic ink; hold 
the letter to the fire for a while and the grateful warmth brings out 
the invisible words.  It is the warmth of this yellow sun of Florence 
that has been restoring the text of my own young romance; the thing 
has been lying before me today as a clear, fresh page.  There have 
been moments during the last ten years when I have fell so 
portentously old, so fagged and finished, that I should have taken as 
a very bad joke any intimation that this present sense of juvenility 
was still in store for me.  It won't last, at any rate; so I had 
better make the best of it.  But I confess it surprises me.  I have 
led too serious a life; but that perhaps, after all, preserves one's 
youth.  At all events, I have travelled too far, I have worked too 
hard, I have lived in brutal climates and associated with tiresome 
people.  When a man has reached his fifty-second year without being, 
materially, the worse for wear--when he has fair health, a fair 
fortune, a tidy conscience and a complete exemption from embarrassing 
relatives--I suppose he is bound, in delicacy, to write himself 
happy.  But I confess I shirk this obligation.  I have not been 
miserable; I won't go so far as to say that--or at least as to write 
it.  But happiness--positive happiness--would have been something 
different.  I don't know that it would have been better, by all 
measurements--that it would have left me better off at the present 
time.  But it certainly would have made this difference--that I 
should not have been reduced, in pursuit of pleasant images, to 
disinter a buried episode of more than a quarter of a century ago.  I 
should have found entertainment more--what shall I call it?--more 
contemporaneous.  I should have had a wife and children, and I should 
not be in the way of making, as the French say, infidelities to the 
present.  Of course it's a great gain to have had an escape, not to 
have committed an act of thumping folly; and I suppose that, whatever 
serious step one might have taken at twenty-five, after a struggle, 
and with a violent effort, and however one's conduct might appear to 
be justified by events, there would always remain a certain element 
of regret; a certain sense of loss lurking in the sense of gain; a 
tendency to wonder, rather wishfully, what MIGHT have been.  What 
might have been, in this case, would, without doubt, have been very 
sad, and what has been has been very cheerful and comfortable; but 
there are nevertheless two or three questions I might ask myself.  
Why, for instance, have I never married--why have I never been able 
to care for any woman as I cared for that one?  Ah, why are the 
mountains blue and why is the sunshine warm?  Happiness mitigated by 
impertinent conjectures--that's about my ticket.
6th.--I knew it wouldn't last; it's already passing away.  But I have 
spent a delightful day; I have been strolling all over the place.  
Everything reminds me of something else, and yet of itself at the 
same time; my imagination makes a great circuit and comes back to the 
starting-point.  There is that well-remembered odour of spring in the 
air, and the flowers, as they used to be, are gathered into great 
sheaves and stacks, all along the rugged base of the Strozzi Palace.  
I wandered for an hour in the Boboli Gardens; we went there several 
times together.  I remember all those days individually; they seem to 
me as yesterday.  I found the corner where she always chose to sit--
the bench of sun-warmed marble, in front of the screen of ilex, with 
that exuberant statue of Pomona just beside it.  The place is exactly 
the same, except that poor Pomona has lost one of her tapering 
fingers.  I sat there for half an hour, and it was strange how near 
to me she seemed.  The place was perfectly empty--that is, it was 
filled with HER.  I closed my eyes and listened; I could almost hear 
the rustle of her dress on the gravel.  Why do we make such an ado 
about death?  What is it, after all, but a sort of refinement of 
life?  She died ten years ago, and yet, as I sat there in the sunny 
stillness, she was a palpable, audible presence.  I went afterwards 
into the gallery of the palace, and wandered for an hour from room to 
room.  The same great pictures hung in the same places, and the same 
dark frescoes arched above them.  Twice, of old, I went there with 
her; she had a great understanding of art.  She understood all sorts 
of things.  Before the Madonna of the Chair I stood a long time.  The 
face is not a particle like hers, and yet it reminded me of her.  But 
everything does that.  We stood and looked at it together once for 
half an hour; I remember perfectly what she said.
8th.--Yesterday I felt blue--blue and bored; and when I got up this 
morning I had half a mind to leave Florence.  But I went out into the 
street, beside the Arno, and looked up and down--looked at the yellow 
river and the violet hills, and then decided to remain--or rather, I 
decided nothing.  I simply stood gazing at the beauty of Florence, 
and before I had gazed my fill I was in good-humour again, and it was 
too late to start for Rome.  I strolled along the quay, where 
something presently happened that rewarded me for staying.  I stopped 
in front of a little jeweller's shop, where a great many objects in 
mosaic were exposed in the window; I stood there for some minutes--I 
don't know why, for I have no taste for mosaic.  In a moment a little 
girl came and stood beside me--a little girl with a frowsy Italian 
head, carrying a basket.  I turned away, but, as I turned, my eyes 
happened to fall on her basket.  It was covered with a napkin, and on 
the napkin was pinned a piece of paper, inscribed with an address.  
This address caught my glance--there was a name on it I knew.  It was 
very legibly written--evidently by a scribe who had made up in zeal 
what was lacking in skill.  Contessa Salvi-Scarabelli, Via 
Ghibellina--so ran the superscription; I looked at it for some 
moments; it caused me a sudden emotion.  Presently the little girl, 
becoming aware of my attention, glanced up at me, wondering, with a 
pair of timid brown eyes.
"Are you carrying your basket to the Countess Salvi?" I asked.
The child stared at me.  "To the Countess Scarabelli."
"Do you know the Countess?"
"Know her?" murmured the child, with an air of small dismay.
"I mean, have you seen her?"
"Yes, I have seen her."  And then, in a moment, with a sudden soft 
smile--"E bella!" said the little girl.  She was beautiful herself as 
she said it.
"Precisely; and is she fair or dark?"
The child kept gazing at me.  "Bionda--bionda," she answered, looking 
about into the golden sunshine for a comparison.
"And is she young?"
"She is not young--like me.  But she is not old like--like--"
"Like me, eh?  And is she married?"
The little girl began to look wise.  "I have never seen the Signor 
Conte."
"And she lives in Via Ghibellina?"
"Sicuro.  In a beautiful palace."
I had one more question to ask, and I pointed it with certain copper 
coins.  "Tell me a little--is she good?"
The child inspected a moment the contents of her little brown fist.  
"It's you who are good," she answered.
"Ah, but the Countess?" I repeated.
My informant lowered her big brown eyes, with an air of conscientious 
meditation that was inexpressibly quaint.  "To me she appears so," 
she said at last, looking up.
"Ah, then, she must be so," I said, "because, for your age, you are 
very intelligent."  And having delivered myself of this compliment I 
walked away and left the little girl counting her soldi.
I walked back to the hotel, wondering how I could learn something 
about the Contessa Salvi-Scarabelli.  In the doorway I found the 
innkeeper, and near him stood a young man whom I immediately 
perceived to be a compatriot, and with whom, apparently, he had been 
in conversation.
"I wonder whether you can give me a piece of information," I said to 
the landlord.  "Do you know anything about the Count Salvi-
Scarabelli?"
The landlord looked down at his boots, then slowly raised his 
shoulders, with a melancholy smile.  "I have many regrets, dear sir--
"
"You don't know the name?"
"I know the name, assuredly.  But I don't know the gentleman."
I saw that my question had attracted the attention of the young 
Englishman, who looked at me with a good deal of earnestness.  He was 
apparently satisfied with what he saw, for he presently decided to 
speak.
"The Count Scarabelli is dead," he said, very gravely.
I looked at him a moment; he was a pleasing young fellow.  "And his 
widow lives," I observed, "in Via Ghibellina?"
"I daresay that is the name of the street."  He was a handsome young 
Englishman, but he was also an awkward one; he wondered who I was and 
what I wanted, and he did me the honour to perceive that, as regards 
these points, my appearance was reassuring.  But he hesitated, very 
properly, to talk with a perfect stranger about a lady whom he knew, 
and he had not the art to conceal his hesitation.  I instantly felt 
it to be singular that though he regarded me as a perfect stranger, I 
had not the same feeling about him.  Whether it was that I had seen 
him before, or simply that I was struck with his agreeable young 
face--at any rate, I felt myself, as they say here, in sympathy with 
him.  If I have seen him before I don't remember the occasion, and 
neither, apparently, does he; I suppose it's only a part of the 
feeling I have had the last three days about everything.  It was this 
feeling that made me suddenly act as if I had known him a long time.
"Do you know the Countess Salvi?" I asked.
He looked at me a little, and then, without resenting the freedom of 
my question--"The Countess Scarabelli, you mean," he said.
"Yes," I answered; "she's the daughter."
"The daughter is a little girl."
"She must be grown up now.  She must be--let me see--close upon 
thirty."
My young Englishman began to smile.  "Of whom are you speaking?"
"I was speaking of the daughter," I said, understanding his smile.  
"But I was thinking of the mother."
"Of the mother?"
"Of a person I knew twenty-seven years ago--the most charming woman I 
have ever known.  She was the Countess Salvi--she lived in a 
wonderful old house in Via Ghibellina."
"A wonderful old house!" my young Englishman repeated.
"She had a little girl," I went on; "and the little girl was very 
fair, like her mother; and the mother and daughter had the same name-
-Bianca."  I stopped and looked at my companion, and he blushed a 
little.  "And Bianca Salvi," I continued, "was the most charming 
woman in the world."  He blushed a little more, and I laid my hand on 
his shoulder.  "Do you know why I tell you this?  Because you remind 
me of what I was when I knew her--when I loved her."  My poor young 
Englishman gazed at me with a sort of embarrassed and fascinated 
stare, and still I went on.  "I say that's the reason I told you 
this--but you'll think it a strange reason.  You remind me of my 
younger self.  You needn't resent that--I was a charming young 
fellow.  The Countess Salvi thought so.  Her daughter thinks the same 
of you."
Instantly, instinctively, he raised his hand to my arm.  "Truly?"
"Ah, you are wonderfully like me!" I said, laughing.  "That was just 
my state of mind.  I wanted tremendously to please her."  He dropped 
his hand and looked away, smiling, but with an air of ingenuous 
confusion which quickened my interest in him.  "You don't know what 
to make of me," I pursued.  "You don't know why a stranger should 
suddenly address you in this way and pretend to read your thoughts.  
Doubtless you think me a little cracked.  Perhaps I am eccentric; but 
it's not so bad as that.  I have lived about the world a great deal, 
following my profession, which is that of a soldier.  I have been in 
India, in Africa, in Canada, and I have lived a good deal alone.  
That inclines people, I think, to sudden bursts of confidence.  A 
week ago I came into Italy, where I spent six months when I was your 
age.  I came straight to Florence--I was eager to see it again, on 
account of associations.  They have been crowding upon me ever so 
thickly.  I have taken the liberty of giving you a hint of them."  
The young man inclined himself a little, in silence, as if he had 
been struck with a sudden respect.  He stood and looked away for a 
moment at the river and the mountains.  "It's very beautiful," I 
said.
"Oh, it's enchanting," he murmured.
"That's the way I used to talk.  But that's nothing to you."
He glanced at me again.  "On the contrary, I like to hear."
"Well, then, let us take a walk.  If you too are staying at this inn, 
we are fellow-travellers.  We will walk down the Arno to the Cascine.  
There are several things I should like to ask of you."
My young Englishman assented with an air of almost filial confidence, 
and we strolled for an hour beside the river and through the shady 
alleys of that lovely wilderness.  We had a great deal of talk:  it's 
not only myself, it's my whole situation over again.
"Are you very fond of Italy?" I asked.
He hesitated a moment.  "One can't express that."
"Just so; I couldn't express it.  I used to try--I used to write 
verses.  On the subject of Italy I was very ridiculous."
"So am I ridiculous," said my companion.
"No, my dear boy," I answered, "we are not ridiculous; we are two 
very reasonable, superior people."
"The first time one comes--as I have done--it's a revelation."
"Oh, I remember well; one never forgets it.  It's an introduction to 
beauty."
"And it must be a great pleasure," said my young friend, "to come 
back."
"Yes, fortunately the beauty is always here.  What form of it," I 
asked, "do you prefer?"
My companion looked a little mystified; and at last he said, "I am 
very fond of the pictures."
"So was I.  And among the pictures, which do you like best?"
"Oh, a great many."
"So did I; but I had certain favourites."
Again the young man hesitated a little, and then he confessed that 
the group of painters he preferred, on the whole, to all others, was 
that of the early Florentines.
I was so struck with this that I stopped short.  "That was exactly my 
taste!"  And then I passed my hand into his arm and we went our way 
again.
We sat down on an old stone bench in the Cascine, and a solemn blank-
eyed Hermes, with wrinkles accentuated by the dust of ages, stood 
above us and listened to our talk.
"The Countess Salvi died ten years ago," I said.
My companion admitted that he had heard her daughter say so.
"After I knew her she married again," I added.  "The Count Salvi died 
before I knew her--a couple of years after their marriage."
"Yes, I have heard that."
"And what else have you heard?"
My companion stared at me; he had evidently heard nothing.
"She was a very interesting woman--there are a great many things to 
be said about her.  Later, perhaps, I will tell you.  Has the 
daughter the same charm?"
"You forget," said my young man, smiling, "that I have never seen the 
mother."
"Very true.  I keep confounding.  But the daughter--how long have you 
known her?"
"Only since I have been here.  A very short time."
"A week?"
For a moment he said nothing.  "A month."
"That's just the answer I should have made.  A week, a month--it was 
all the same to me."
"I think it is more than a month," said the young man.
"It's probably six.  How did you make her acquaintance?"
"By a letter--an introduction given me by a friend in England."
"The analogy is complete," I said.  "But the friend who gave me my 
letter to Madame de Salvi died many years ago.  He, too, admired her 
greatly.  I don't know why it never came into my mind that her 
daughter might be living in Florence.  Somehow I took for granted it 
was all over.  I never thought of the little girl; I never heard what 
had become of her.  I walked past the palace yesterday and saw that 
it was occupied; but I took for granted it had changed hands."
"The Countess Scarabelli," said my friend, "brought it to her husband 
as her marriage-portion."
"I hope he appreciated it!  There is a fountain in the court, and 
there is a charming old garden beyond it.  The Countess's sitting-
room looks into that garden.  The staircase is of white marble, and 
there is a medallion by Luca della Robbia set into the wall at the 
place where it makes a bend.  Before you come into the drawing-room 
you stand a moment in a great vaulted place hung round with faded 
tapestry, paved with bare tiles, and furnished only with three 
chairs.  In the drawing-room, above the fireplace, is a superb Andrea 
del Sarto.  The furniture is covered with pale sea-green."
My companion listened to all this.
"The Andrea del Sarto is there; it's magnificent.  But the furniture 
is in pale red."
"Ah, they have changed it, then--in twenty-seven years."
"And there's a portrait of Madame de Salvi," continued my friend.
I was silent a moment.  "I should like to see that."
He too was silent.  Then he asked, "Why don't you go and see it?  If 
you knew the mother so well, why don't you call upon the daughter?"
"From what you tell me I am afraid."
"What have I told you to make you afraid?"
I looked a little at his ingenuous countenance.  "The mother was a 
very dangerous woman."
The young Englishman began to blush again.  "The daughter is not," he 
said.
"Are you very sure?"
He didn't say he was sure, but he presently inquired in what way the 
Countess Salvi had been dangerous.
"You must not ask me that," I answered "for after all, I desire to 
remember only what was good in her."  And as we walked back I begged 
him to render me the service of mentioning my name to his friend, and 
of saying that I had known her mother well, and that I asked 
permission to come and see her.
9th.--I have seen that poor boy half a dozen times again, and a most 
amiable young fellow he is.  He continues to represent to me, in the 
most extraordinary manner, my own young identity; the correspondence 
is perfect at all points, save that he is a better boy than I.  He is 
evidently acutely interested in his Countess, and leads quite the 
same life with her that I led with Madame de Salvi.  He goes to see 
her every evening and stays half the night; these Florentines keep 
the most extraordinary hours.  I remember, towards 3 A.M., Madame de 
Salvi used to turn me out.--"Come, come," she would say, "it's time 
to go.  If you were to stay later people might talk."  I don't know 
at what time he comes home, but I suppose his evening seems as short 
as mine did.  Today he brought me a message from his Contessa--a very 
gracious little speech.  She remembered often to have heard her 
mother speak of me--she called me her English friend.  All her 
mother's friends were dear to her, and she begged I would do her the 
honour to come and see her.  She is always at home of an evening.  
Poor young Stanmer (he is of the Devonshire Stanmers--a great 
property) reported this speech verbatim, and of course it can't in 
the least signify to him that a poor grizzled, battered soldier, old 
enough to be his father, should come to call upon his inammorata.  
But I remember how it used to matter to me when other men came; 
that's a point of difference.  However, it's only because I'm so old.  
At twenty-five I shouldn't have been afraid of myself at fifty-two.  
Camerino was thirty-four--and then the others!  She was always at 
home in the evening, and they all used to come.  They were old 
Florentine names.  But she used to let me stay after them all; she 
thought an old English name as good.  What a transcendent coquette! . 
. . But basta cosi as she used to say.  I meant to go tonight to Casa 
Salvi, but I couldn't bring myself to the point.  I don't know what 
I'm afraid of; I used to be in a hurry enough to go there once.  I 
suppose I am afraid of the very look of the place--of the old rooms, 
the old walls.  I shall go tomorrow night.  I am afraid of the very 
echoes.
10th.--She has the most extraordinary resemblance to her mother.  
When I went in I was tremendously startled; I stood starting at her.  
I have just come home; it is past midnight; I have been all the 
evening at Casa Salvi.  It is very warm--my window is open--I can 
look out on the river gliding past in the starlight.  So, of old, 
when I came home, I used to stand and look out.  There are the same 
cypresses on the opposite hills.
Poor young Stanmer was there, and three or four other admirers; they 
all got up when I came in.  I think I had been talked about, and 
there was some curiosity.  But why should I have been talked about?  
They were all youngish men--none of them of my time.  She is a 
wonderful likeness of her mother; I couldn't get over it.  Beautiful 
like her mother, and yet with the same faults in her face; but with 
her mother's perfect head and brow and sympathetic, almost pitying, 
eyes.  Her face has just that peculiarity of her mother's, which, of 
all human countenances that I have ever known, was the one that 
passed most quickly and completely from the expression of gaiety to 
that of repose.  Repose in her face always suggested sadness; and 
while you were watching it with a kind of awe, and wondering of what 
tragic secret it was the token, it kindled, on the instant, into a 
radiant Italian smile.  The Countess Scarabelli's smiles tonight, 
however, were almost uninterrupted.  She greeted me--divinely, as her 
mother used to do; and young Stanmer sat in the corner of the sofa--
as I used to do--and watched her while she talked.  She is thin and 
very fair, and was dressed in light, vaporous black that completes 
the resemblance.  The house, the rooms, are almost absolutely the 
same; there may be changes of detail, but they don't modify the 
general effect.  There are the same precious pictures on the walls of 
the salon--the same great dusky fresco in the concave ceiling.  The 
daughter is not rich, I suppose, any more than the mother.  The 
furniture is worn and faded, and I was admitted by a solitary 
servant, who carried a twinkling taper before me up the great dark 
marble staircase.
"I have often heard of you," said the Countess, as I sat down near 
her; "my mother often spoke of you."
"Often?" I answered.  "I am surprised at that."
"Why are you surprised?  Were you not good friends?"
"Yes, for a certain time--very good friends.  But I was sure she had 
forgotten me."
"She never forgot," said the Countess, looking at me intently and 
smiling.  "She was not like that."
"She was not like most other women in any way," I declared.
"Ah, she was charming," cried the Countess, rattling open her fan.  
"I have always been very curious to see you.  I have received an 
impression of you."
"A good one, I hope."
She looked at me, laughing, and not answering this:  it was just her 
mother's trick.
"'My Englishman,' she used to call you--'il mio Inglese.'"
"I hope she spoke of me kindly," I insisted.
The Countess, still laughing, gave a little shrug balancing her hand 
to and fro.  "So-so; I always supposed you had had a quarrel.  You 
don't mind my being frank like this--eh?"
"I delight in it; it reminds me of your mother."
"Every one tells me that.  But I am not clever like her.  You will 
see for yourself."
"That speech," I said, "completes the resemblance.  She was always 
pretending she was not clever, and in reality--"
"In reality she was an angel, eh?  To escape from dangerous 
comparisons I will admit, then, that I am clever.  That will make a 
difference.  But let us talk of you.  You are very--how shall I say 
it?--very eccentric."
"Is that what your mother told you?"
"To tell the truth, she spoke of you as a great original.  But aren't 
all Englishmen eccentric?  All except that one!" and the Countess 
pointed to poor Stanmer, in his corner of the sofa.
"Oh, I know just what he is," I said.
"He's as quiet as a lamb--he's like all the world," cried the 
Countess.
"Like all the world--yes.  He is in love with you."
She looked at me with sudden gravity.  "I don't object to your saying 
that for all the world--but I do for him."
"Well," I went on, "he is peculiar in this:  he is rather afraid of 
you."
Instantly she began to smile; she turned her face toward Stanmer.  He 
had seen that we were talking about him; he coloured and got up--then 
came toward us.
"I like men who are afraid of nothing," said our hostess.
"I know what you want," I said to Stanmer.  "You want to know what 
the Signora Contessa says about you."
Stanmer looked straight into her face, very gravely.  "I don't care a 
straw what she says."
"You are almost a match for the Signora Contessa," I answered.  "She 
declares she doesn't care a pin's head what you think."
"I recognise the Countess's style!" Stanmer exclaimed, turning away.
"One would think," said the Countess, "that you were trying to make a 
quarrel between us."
I watched him move away to another part of the great saloon; he stood 
in front of the Andrea del Sarto, looking up at it.  But he was not 
seeing it; he was listening to what we might say.  I often stood 
there in just that way.  "He can't quarrel with you, any more than I 
could have quarrelled with your mother."
"Ah, but you did.  Something painful passed between you."
"Yes, it was painful, but it was not a quarrel.  I went away one day 
and never saw her again.  That was all."
The Countess looked at me gravely.  "What do you call it when a man 
does that?"
"It depends upon the case."
"Sometimes," said the Countess in French, "it's a lachete."
"Yes, and sometimes it's an act of wisdom."
"And sometimes," rejoined the Countess, "it's a mistake."
I shook my head.  "For me it was no mistake."
She began to laugh again.  "Caro Signore, you're a great original.  
What had my poor mother done to you?"
I looked at our young Englishman, who still had his back turned to us 
and was staring up at the picture.  "I will tell you some other 
time," I said.
"I shall certainly remind you; I am very curious to know."  Then she 
opened and shut her fan two or three times, still looking at me.  
What eyes they have!  "Tell me a little," she went on, "if I may ask 
without indiscretion.  Are you married?"
"No, Signora Contessa."
"Isn't that at least a mistake?"
"Do I look very unhappy?"
She dropped her head a little to one side.  "For an Englishman--no!"
"Ah," said I, laughing, "you are quite as clever as your mother."
"And they tell me that you are a great soldier," she continued; "you 
have lived in India.  It was very kind of you, so far away, to have 
remembered our poor dear Italy."
"One always remembers Italy; the distance makes no difference.  I 
remembered it well the day I heard of your mother's death!"
"Ah, that was a sorrow!" said the Countess.  "There's not a day that 
I don't weep for her.  But che vuole?  She's a saint its paradise."
"Sicuro," I answered; and I looked some time at the ground.  "But 
tell me about yourself, dear lady," I asked at last, raising my eyes.  
"You have also had the sorrow of losing your husband."
"I am a poor widow, as you see.  Che vuole?  My husband died after 
three years of marriage."
I waited for her to remark that the late Count Scarabelli was also a 
saint in paradise, but I waited in vain.
"That was like your distinguished father," I said.
"Yes, he too died young.  I can't be said to have known him; I was 
but of the age of my own little girl.  But I weep for him all the 
more."
Again I was silent for a moment.
"It was in India too," I said presently, "that I heard of your 
mother's second marriage."
The Countess raised her eyebrows.
"In India, then, one hears of everything!  Did that news please you?"
"Well, since you ask me--no."
"I understand that," said the Countess, looking at her open fan.  "I 
shall not marry again like that."
"That's what your mother said to me," I ventured to observe.
She was not offended, but she rose from her seat and stood looking at 
me a moment.  Then--"You should not have gone away!" she exclaimed.  
I stayed for another hour; it is a very pleasant house.
Two or three of the men who were sitting there seemed very civil and 
intelligent; one of them was a major of engineers, who offered me a 
profusion of information upon the new organisation of the Italian 
army.  While he talked, however, I was observing our hostess, who was 
talking with the others; very little, I noticed, with her young 
Inglese.  She is altogether charming--full of frankness and freedom, 
of that inimitable disinvoltura which in an Englishwoman would be 
vulgar, and which in her is simply the perfection of apparent 
spontaneity.  But for all her spontaneity she's as subtle as a 
needle-point, and knows tremendously well what she is about.  If she 
is not a consummate coquette . . . What had she in her head when she 
said that I should not have gone away?--Poor little Stanmer didn't go 
away.  I left him there at midnight.
12th.--I found him today sitting in the church of Santa Croce, into 
which I wandered to escape from the heat of the sun.
In the nave it was cool and dim; he was staring at the blaze of 
candles on the great altar, and thinking, I am sure, of his 
incomparable Countess.  I sat down beside him, and after a while, as 
if to avoid the appearance of eagerness, he asked me how I had 
enjoyed my visit to Casa Salvi, and what I thought of the padrona.
"I think half a dozen things," I said, "but I can only tell you one 
now.  She's an enchantress.  You shall hear the rest when we have 
left the church."
"An enchantress?" repeated Stanmer, looking at me askance.
He is a very simple youth, but who am I to blame him?
"A charmer," I said "a fascinatress!"
He turned away, staring at the altar candles.
"An artist--an actress," I went on, rather brutally.
He gave me another glance.
"I think you are telling me all," he said.
"No, no, there is more."  And we sat a long time in silence.
At last he proposed that we should go out; and we passed in the 
street, where the shadows had begun to stretch themselves.
"I don't know what you mean by her being an actress," he said, as we 
turned homeward.
"I suppose not.  Neither should I have known, if any one had said 
that to me."
"You are thinking about the mother," said Stanmer.  "Why are you 
always bringing HER in?"
"My dear boy, the analogy is so great it forces itself upon me."
He stopped and stood looking at me with his modest, perplexed young 
face.  I thought he was going to exclaim--"The analogy be hanged!"--
but he said after a moment -
"Well, what does it prove?"
"I can't say it proves anything; but it suggests a great many 
things."
"Be so good as to mention a few," he said, as we walked on.
"You are not sure of her yourself," I began.
"Never mind that--go on with your analogy."
"That's a part of it.  You ARE very much in love with her."
"That's a part of it too, I suppose?"
"Yes, as I have told you before.  You are in love with her, and yet 
you can't make her out; that's just where I was with regard to Madame 
de Salvi."
"And she too was an enchantress, an actress, an artist, and all the 
rest of it?"
"She was the most perfect coquette I ever knew, and the most 
dangerous, because the most finished."
"What you mean, then, is that her daughter is a finished coquette?"
"I rather think so."
Stanmer walked along for some moments in silence.
"Seeing that you suppose me to be a--a great admirer of the 
Countess," he said at last, "I am rather surprised at the freedom 
with which you speak of her."
I confessed that I was surprised at it myself.  "But it's on account 
of the interest I take in you."
"I am immensely obliged to you!" said the poor boy.
"Ah, of course you don't like it.  That is, you like my interest--I 
don't see how you can help liking that; but you don't like my 
freedom.  That's natural enough; but, my dear young friend, I want 
only to help you.  If a man had said to me--so many years ago--what I 
am saying to you, I should certainly also, at first, have thought him 
a great brute.  But after a little, I should have been grateful--I 
should have felt that he was helping me."
"You seem to have been very well able to help yourself," said 
Stanmer.  "You tell me you made your escape."
"Yes, but it was at the cost of infinite perplexity--of what I may 
call keen suffering.  I should like to save you all that."
"I can only repeat--it is really very kind of you."
"Don't repeat it too often, or I shall begin to think you don't mean 
it."
"Well," said Stanmer, "I think this, at any rate--that you take an 
extraordinary responsibility in trying to put a man out of conceit of 
a woman who, as he believes, may make him very happy."
I grasped his arm, and we stopped, going on with our talk like a 
couple of Florentines.
"Do you wish to marry her?"
He looked away, without meeting my eyes.  "It's a great 
responsibility," he repeated.
"Before Heaven," I said, "I would have married the mother!  You are 
exactly in my situation."
"Don't you think you rather overdo the analogy?" asked poor Stanmer.
"A little more, a little less--it doesn't matter.  I believe you are 
in my shoes.  But of course if you prefer it, I will beg a thousand 
pardons and leave them to carry you where they will."
He had been looking away, but now he slowly turned his face and met 
my eyes.  "You have gone too far to retreat; what is it you know 
about her?"
"About this one--nothing.  But about the other--"
"I care nothing about the other!"
"My dear fellow," I said, "they are mother and daughter--they are as 
like as two of Andrea's Madonnas."
"If they resemble each other, then, you were simply mistaken in the 
mother."
I took his arm and we walked on again; there seemed no adequate reply 
to such a charge.  "Your state of mind brings back my own so 
completely," I said presently.  "You admire her--you adore her, and 
yet, secretly, you mistrust her.  You are enchanted with her personal 
charm, her grace, her wit, her everything; and yet in your private 
heart you are afraid of her."
"Afraid of her?"
"Your mistrust keeps rising to the surface; you can't rid yourself of 
the suspicion that at the bottom of all things she is hard and cruel, 
and you would be immensely relieved if some one should persuade you 
that your suspicion is right."
Stanmer made no direct reply to this; but before we reached the hotel 
he said--"What did you ever know about the mother?"
"It's a terrible story," I answered.
He looked at me askance.  "What did she do?"
"Come to my rooms this evening and I will tell you."
He declared he would, but he never came.  Exactly the way I should 
have acted!
14th.--I went again, last evening, to Casa Salvi, where I found the 
same little circle, with the addition of a couple of ladies.  Stanmer 
was there, trying hard to talk to one of them, but making, I am sure, 
a very poor business of it.  The Countess--well, the Countess was 
admirable.  She greeted me like a friend of ten years, toward whom 
familiarity should not have engendered a want of ceremony; she made 
me sit near her, and she asked me a dozen questions about my health 
and my occupations.
"I live in the past," I said.  "I go into the galleries, into the old 
palaces and the churches.  Today I spent an hour in Michael Angelo's 
chapel at San Loreozo."
"Ah yes, that's the past," said the Countess.  "Those things are very 
old."
"Twenty-seven years old," I answered.
"Twenty-seven?  Altro!"
"I mean my own past," I said.  "I went to a great many of those 
places with your mother."
"Ah, the pictures are beautiful," murmured the Countess, glancing at 
Stanmer.
"Have you lately looked at any of them?" I asked.  "Have you gone to 
the galleries with HIM?"
She hesitated a moment, smiling.  "It seems to me that your question 
is a little impertinent.  But I think you are like that."
"A little impertinent?  Never.  As I say, your mother did me the 
honour, more than once, to accompany me to the Uffizzi."
"My mother must have been very kind to you."
"So it seemed to me at the time."
"At the time only?"
"Well, if you prefer, so it seems to me now."
"Eh," said the Countess, "she made sacrifices."
"To what, cara Signora?  She was perfectly free.  Your lamented 
father was dead--and she had not yet contracted her second marriage."
"If she was intending to marry again, it was all the more reason she 
should have been careful."
I looked at her a moment; she met my eyes gravely, over the top of 
her fan.  "Are YOU very careful?" I said.
She dropped her fan with a certain violence.  "Ah, yes, you are 
impertinent!"
"Ah no," I said.  "Remember that I am old enough to be your father; 
that I knew you when you were three years old.  I may surely ask such 
questions.  But you are right; one must do your mother justice.  She 
was certainly thinking of her second marriage."
"You have not forgiven her that!" said the Countess, very gravely.
"Have you?" I asked, more lightly.
"I don't judge my mother.  That is a mortal sin.  My stepfather was 
very kind to me."
"I remember him," I said; "I saw him a great many times--your mother 
already received him."
My hostess sat with lowered eyes, saying nothing; but she presently 
looked up.
"She was very unhappy with my father."
"That I can easily believe.  And your stepfather--is he still 
living?"
"He died--before my mother."
"Did he fight any more duels?"
"He was killed in a duel," said the Countess, discreetly.
It seems almost monstrous, especially as I can give no reason for it-
-but this announcement, instead of shocking me, caused me to feel a 
strange exhilaration.  Most assuredly, after all these years, I bear 
the poor man no resentment.  Of course I controlled my manner, and 
simply remarked to the Countess that as his fault had been so was his 
punishment.  I think, however, that the feeling of which I speak was 
at the bottom of my saying to her that I hoped that, unlike her 
mother's, her own brief married life had been happy.
"If it was not," she said, "I have forgotten it now."--I wonder if 
the late Count Scarabelli was also killed in a duel, and if his 
adversary . . . Is it on the books that his adversary, as well, shall 
perish by the pistol?  Which of those gentlemen is he, I wonder?  Is 
it reserved for poor little Stanmer to put a bullet into him?  No; 
poor little Stanmer, I trust, will do as I did.  And yet, 
unfortunately for him, that woman is consummately plausible.  She was 
wonderfully nice last evening; she was really irresistible.  Such 
frankness and freedom, and yet something so soft and womanly; such 
graceful gaiety, so much of the brightness, without any of the 
stiffness, of good breeding, and over it all something so 
picturesquely simple and southern.  She is a perfect Italian.  But 
she comes honestly by it.  After the talk I have just jotted down she 
changed her place, and the conversation for half an hour was general.  
Stanmer indeed said very little; partly, I suppose, because he is shy 
of talking a foreign tongue.  Was I like that--was I so constantly 
silent?  I suspect I was when I was perplexed, and Heaven knows that 
very often my perplexity was extreme.  Before I went away I had a few 
more words tete-a-tete with the Countess.
"I hope you are not leaving Florence yet," she said; "you will stay a 
while longer?"
I answered that I came only for a week, and that my week was over.
"I stay on from day to day, I am so much interested."
"Eh, it's the beautiful moment.  I'm glad our city pleases you!"
"Florence pleases me--and I take a paternal interest to our young 
friend," I added, glancing at Stanmer.  "I have become very fond of 
him."
"Bel tipo inglese," said my hostess.  "And he is very intelligent; he 
has a beautiful mind."
She stood there resting her smile and her clear, expressive eyes upon 
me.
"I don't like to praise him too much," I rejoined, "lest I should 
appear to praise myself; he reminds me so much of what I was at his 
age.  If your beautiful mother were to come to life for an hour she 
would see the resemblance."
She gave me a little amused stare.
"And yet you don't look at all like him!"
"Ah, you didn't know me when I was twenty-five.  I was very handsome!  
And, moreover, it isn't that, it's the mental resemblance.  I was 
ingenuous, candid, trusting, like him."
"Trusting?  I remember my mother once telling me that you were the 
most suspicious and jealous of men!"
"I fell into a suspicious mood, but I was, fundamentally, not in the 
least addicted to thinking evil.  I couldn't easily imagine any harm 
of any one."
"And so you mean that Mr. Stanmer is in a suspicions mood?"
"Well, I mean that his situation is the same as mine."
The Countess gave me one of her serious looks.  "Come," she said, 
"what was it--this famous situation of yours?  I have heard you 
mention it before."
"Your mother might have told you, since she occasionally did me the 
honour to speak of me."
"All my mother ever told me was that you were--a sad puzzle to her."
At this, of course, I laughed out--I laugh still as I write it.
"Well, then, that was my situation--I was a sad puzzle to a very 
clever woman."
"And you mean, therefore, that I am a puzzle to poor Mr. Stanmer?"
"He is racking his brains to make you out.  Remember it was you who 
said he was intelligent."
She looked round at him, and as fortune would have it, his appearance 
at that moment quite confirmed my assertion.  He was lounging back in 
his chair with an air of indolence rather too marked for a drawing-
room, and staring at the ceiling with the expression of a man who has 
just been asked a conundrum.  Madame Scarabelli seemed struck with 
his attitude.
"Don't you see," I said, "he can't read the riddle?"
"You yourself," she answered, "said he was incapable of thinking 
evil.  I should be sorry to have him think any evil of ME."
And she looked straight at me--seriously, appealingly--with her 
beautiful candid brow.
I inclined myself, smiling, in a manner which might have meant--"How 
could that be possible?"
"I have a great esteem for him," she went on; "I want him to think 
well of me.  If I am a puzzle to him, do me a little service.  
Explain me to him."
"Explain you, dear lady?"
"You are older and wiser than he.  Make him understand me."
She looked deep into my eyes for a moment, and then she turned away.
26th.--I have written nothing for a good many days, but meanwhile I 
have been half a dozen times to Casa Salvi.  I have seen a good deal 
also of my young friend--had a good many walks and talks with him.  I 
have proposed to him to come with me to Venice for a fortnight, but 
he won't listen to the idea of leaving Florence.  He is very happy in 
spite of his doubts, and I confess that in the perception of his 
happiness I have lived over again my own.  This is so much the case 
that when, the other day, he at last made up his mind to ask me to 
tell him the wrong that Madame de Salvi had done me, I rather checked 
his curiosity.  I told him that if he was bent upon knowing I would 
satisfy him, but that it seemed a pity, just now, to indulge in 
painful imagery.
"But I thought you wanted so much to put me out of conceit of our 
friend."
"I admit I am inconsistent, but there are various reasons for it.  In 
the first place--it's obvious--I am open to the charge of playing a 
double game.  I profess an admiration for the Countess Scarabelli, 
for I accept her hospitality, and at the same time I attempt to 
poison your mind; isn't that the proper expression?  I can't exactly 
make up my mind to that, though my admiration for the Countess and my 
desire to prevent you from taking a foolish step are equally sincere.  
And then, in the second place, you seem to me, on the whole, so 
happy!  One hesitates to destroy an illusion, no matter how 
pernicious, that is so delightful while it lasts.  These are the rare 
moments of life.  To be young and ardent, in the midst of an Italian 
spring, and to believe in the moral perfection of a beautiful woman--
what an admirable situation!  Float with the current; I'll stand on 
the brink and watch you."
"Your real reason is that you feel you have no case against the poor 
lady," said Stanmer.  "You admire her as much as I do."
"I just admitted that I admired her.  I never said she was a vulgar 
flirt; her mother was an absolutely scientific one.  Heaven knows I 
admired that!  It's a nice point, however, how much one is hound in 
honour not to warn a young friend against a dangerous woman because 
one also has relations of civility with the lady."
"In such a case," said Stanmer, "I would break off my relations."
I looked at him, and I think I laughed.
"Are you jealous of me, by chance?"
He shook his head emphatically.
"Not in the least; I like to see you there, because your conduct 
contradicts your words."
"I have always said that the Countess is fascinating."
"Otherwise," said Stanmer, "in the case you speak of I would give the 
lady notice."
"Give her notice?"
"Mention to her that you regard her with suspicion, and that you 
propose to do your best to rescue a simple-minded youth from her 
wiles.  That would be more loyal."  And he began to laugh again.
It is not the first time he has laughed at me; but I have never 
minded it, because I have always understood it.
"Is that what you recommend me to say to the Countess?" I asked.
"Recommend you!" he exclaimed, laughing again; "I recommend nothing.  
I may be the victim to be rescued, but I am at least not a partner to 
the conspiracy.  Besides," he added in a moment, "the Countess knows 
your state of mind."
"Has she told you so?"
Stanmer hesitated.
"She has begged me to listen to everything you may say against her.  
She declares that she has a good conscience."
"Ah," said I, "she's an accomplished woman!"
And it is indeed very clever of her to take that tone.  Stanmer 
afterwards assured me explicitly that he has never given her a hint 
of the liberties I have taken in conversation with--what shall I call 
it?--with her moral nature; she has guessed them for herself.  She 
must hate me intensely, and yet her manner has always been so 
charming to me!  She is truly an accomplished woman!
May 4th.--I have stayed away from Casa Salvi for a week, but I have 
lingered on in Florence, under a mixture of impulses.  I have had it 
on my conscience not to go near the Countess again--and yet from the 
moment she is aware of the way I feel about her, it is open war.  
There need be no scruples on either side.  She is as free to use 
every possible art to entangle poor Stanmer more closely as I am to 
clip her fine-spun meshes.  Under the circumstances, however, we 
naturally shouldn't meet very cordially.  But as regards her meshes, 
why, after all, should I clip them?  It would really be very 
interesting to see Stanmer swallowed up.  I should like to see how he 
would agree with her after she had devoured him--(to what vulgar 
imagery, by the way, does curiosity reduce a man!)  Let him finish 
the story in his own way, as I finished it in mine.  It is the same 
story; but why, a quarter of a century later, should it have the same 
denoument?  Let him make his own denoument.
5th.--Hang it, however, I don't want the poor boy to be miserable.
6th.--Ah, but did my denoument then prove such a happy one?
7th.--He came to my room late last night; he was much excited.
"What was it she did to you?" he asked.
I answered him first with another question.  "Have you quarrelled 
with the Countess?"
But he only repeated his own.  "What was it she did to you?"
"Sit down and I'll tell you."  And he sat there beside the candle, 
staring at me.  "There was a man always there--Count Camerino."
"The man she married?"
"The man she married.  I was very much in love with her, and yet I 
didn't trust her.  I was sure that she lied; I believed that she 
could be cruel.  Nevertheless, at moments, she had a charm which made 
it pure pedantry to be conscious of her faults; and while these 
moments lasted I would have done anything for her.  Unfortunately 
they didn't last long.  But you know what I mean; am I not describing 
the Scarabelli?"
"The Countess Scarabelli never lied!" cried Stanmer.
"That's just what I would have said to any one who should have made 
the insinutation!  But I suppose you are not asking me the question 
you put to me just now from dispassionate curiosity."
"A man may want to know!" said the innocent fellow.
I couldn't help laughing out.  "This, at any rate, is my story.  
Camerino was always there; he was a sort of fixture in the house.  If 
I had moments of dislike for the divine Bianca, I had no moments of 
liking for him.  And yet he was a very agreeable fellow, very civil, 
very intelligent, not in the least disposed to make a quarrel with 
me.  The trouble, of course, was simply that I was jealous of him.  I 
don't know, however, on what ground I could have quarrelled with him, 
for I had no definite rights.  I can't say what I expected--I can't 
say what, as the matter stood, I was prepared to do.  With my name 
and my prospects, I might perfectly have offered her my hand.  I am 
not sure that she would have accepted it--I am by no means clear that 
she wanted that.  But she wanted, wanted keenly, to attach me to her; 
she wanted to have me about.  I should have been capable of giving up 
everything--England, my career, my family--simply to devote myself to 
her, to live near her and see her every day."
"Why didn't you do it, then?" asked Stanmer.
"Why don't you?"
"To be a proper rejoinder to my question," he said, rather neatly, 
"yours should be asked twenty-five years hence."
"It remains perfectly true that at a given moment I was capable of 
doing as I say.  That was what she wanted--a rich, susceptible, 
credulous, convenient young Englishman established near her en 
permanence.  And yet," I added, "I must do her complete justice.  I 
honestly believe she was fond of me."  At this Stanmer got up and 
walked to the window; he stood looking out a moment, and then he 
