Guardian of innocence . Bastion of moral consciousness . Virtue?s the 
sublime awareness that winnows knave from noble . Bequeaths those 
deserving with legitimate trophies . Their bounty swell with honours 
honourably won and deeds nobly done .
NIGHT:	I see that much still lodge in your mind like a bursting powder keg you 
are . You have a willing pair of ears and a flint for your powder in me .
DAY:	You have discerned well . Amusing it is to know that Night has 
clairvoyant sight ! I have laid sight on debilitating Despair . Droves of 
souls lie prostrate . Mowed by Doubt . Despair drapes its cloak over 
Hope . Stifling garotte which asphyxiates optimistic Faith . This slate 
implodes upon itself and spares no refrain in dejected denial . Clouding up 
mood of others with plaintive pestilence . What else are you Despair ? An 
abyss that impel those hopelorn over the precipice . Propel average souls 
towards uncharacteristic foolhardiness in their desperation . While the 
scales of Justice weigh Circumstance and Consequence , Life reels from 
the outrage. What of you Night ? Have you saving grace for these souls ?
NIGHT:	I have . Faith?s the obstinate flame unbowed even though adversity 
threatens to douse earnest efforts . A shaft that leads out of the pit . 
Secret aspirations whispered to ourselves . A place we dare visit amid 
private reverie?s vision with a longing contrary to present inconvenience . 
A bulwark Faith is . It controverts scattering fickleness . Surety in spirit 
against floundering facades for Faith invigorates mortal hearts with 
obdurate conviction .
DAY:	A saving grace and no less eloquent ! My cousin the clairvoyant ! Yet I 
wish to add , there are those who fear still the onset of Night . It is sight 
that is frail and sight that is oft at fault . Illuminated by daylight , leafless 
branches are leaden exceptions against plush terraces . ?neath scanty light 
of Night , those same branches appear like unsheathed ghostly daggers , 
suspended at menacing height . Buoyed by safety in numbers , masked by 
scarce light , formidable silhouettes , agitators of patience , crucibles of 
resolve , teasers of courage , all charge boldly . How one wishes for 
guardian gargoyles to smite these preying spectres ! Friends and foes 
blurred by garbled silhouettes . Proximity reveal tardily or opportunely . 
Outcome rests on gifts of deftness and speed .
NIGHT:	Hold still there ! I do bear comfort too ! For those who shun the sun at its 
midday prime , the evening phase becomes their chosen juncture to 
emerge and gaze at day without braving sting of heat or pallor of a tan . I 
spare their sight from instinctively squinting . Moisten not their clothing 
with noon swelter . The Day is the more boisterous portion of the two . 
Suburbs and metropolis reverberate with industrious din . Smoke stacks 
increase exhaust density . In the desert , Day misleads sight while I 
undeniably obscure . Sunlight sparks upon the sand as flickering mirages 
