     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR
     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to " Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
We are planning on making some changes in our donation structure
in 2000, so you might want to email me, hart@pobox.com beforehand.
*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*
This etext was scanned by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the 1893 Macmillan and Co. edition.  Proofing was by Nina
Hall, Mohua Sen, Bridie, Francine Smith and David.
Greville Fane
by Henry James
Coming in to dress for dinner, I found a telegram:  "Mrs. Stormer
dying; can you give us half a column for to-morrow evening?  Let her
off easy, but not too easy."  I was late; I was in a hurry; I had
very little time to think, but at a venture I dispatched a reply:
"Will do what I can."  It was not till I had dressed and was rolling
away to dinner that, in the hansom, I bethought myself of the
difficulty of the condition attached.  The difficulty was not of
course in letting her off easy but in qualifying that indulgence.  "I
simply won't qualify it," I said to myself.  I didn't admire her, but
I liked her, and I had known her so long that I almost felt heartless
in sitting down at such an hour to a feast of indifference.  I must
have seemed abstracted, for the early years of my acquaintance with
her came back to me.  I spoke of her to the lady I had taken down,
hut the lady I had taken down had never heard of Greville Fane.  I
tried my other neighbour, who pronounced her books "too vile."  I had
never thought them very good, but I should let her off easier than
that.
I came away early, for the express purpose of driving to ask about
her.  The journey took time, for she lived in the north-west
district, in the neighbourhood of Primrose Hill.  My apprehension
that I should be too late was justified in a fuller sense than I had
attached to it--I had only feared that the house would be shut up.
There were lights in the windows, and the temperate tinkle of my bell
brought a servant immediately to the door, but poor Mrs. Stormer had
passed into a state in which the resonance of no earthly knocker was
to be feared.  A lady, in the hall, hovering behind the servant, came
forward when she heard my voice.  I recognised Lady Luard, but she
had mistaken me for the doctor.
"Excuse my appearing at such an hour," I said; "it was the first
possible moment after I heard."
"It's all over," Lady Luard replied.  "Dearest mamma!"
She stood there under the lamp with her eyes on me; she was very
tall, very stiff, very cold, and always looked as if these things,
and some others beside, in her dress, her manner and even her name,
were an implication that she was very admirable.  I had never been
able to follow the argument, but that is a detail.  I expressed
briefly and frankly what I felt, while the little mottled maidservant
flattened herself against the wall of the narrow passage and tried to
look detached without looking indifferent.  It was not a moment to
make a visit, and I was on the point of retreating when Lady Luard
arrested me with a queer, casual, drawling "Would you--a--would you,
perhaps, be WRITING something?"  I felt for the instant like an
interviewer, which I was not.  But I pleaded guilty to this
intention, on which she rejoined:  "I'm so very glad--but I think my
brother would like to see you."  I detested her brother, but it
wasn't an occasion to act this out; so I suffered myself to be
inducted, to my surprise, into a small back room which I immediately
recognised as the scene, during the later years, of Mrs. Stormer's
imperturbable industry.  Her table was there, the battered and
blotted accessory to innumerable literary lapses, with its contracted
space for the arms (she wrote only from the elbow down) and the
confusion of scrappy, scribbled sheets which had already become
literary remains.  Leolin was also there, smoking a cigarette before
the fire and looking impudent even in his grief, sincere as it well
might have been.
To meet him, to greet him, I had to make a sharp effort; for the air
that he wore to me as he stood before me was quite that of his
mother's murderer.  She lay silent for ever upstairs--as dead as an
unsuccessful book, and his swaggering erectness was a kind of symbol
of his having killed her.  I wondered if he had already, with his
sister, been calculating what they could get for the poor papers on
the table; but I had not long to wait to learn, for in reply to the
scanty words of sympathy I addressed him he puffed out:  "It's
miserable, miserable, yes; but she has left three books complete."
His words had the oddest effect; they converted the cramped little
room into a seat of trade and made the "book" wonderfully feasible.
He would certainly get all that could be got for the three.  Lady
Luard explained to me that her husband had been with them but had had
to go down to the House.  To her brother she explained that I was
going to write something, and to me again she made it clear that she
hoped I would "do mamma justice."  She added that she didn't think
this had ever been done.  She said to her brother:  "Don't you think
there are some things he ought thoroughly to understand?" and on his
instantly exclaiming "Oh, thoroughly--thoroughly!" she went on,
rather austerely:  "I mean about mamma's birth."
"Yes, and her connections," Leolin added.
I professed every willingness, and for five minutes I listened, but
it would be too much to say that I understood.  I don't even now, but
it is not important.  My vision was of other matters than those they
put before me, and while they desired there should be no mistake
about their ancestors I became more and more lucid about themselves.
I got away as soon as possible, and walked home through the great
dusky, empty London--the best of all conditions for thought.  By the
time I reached my door my little article was practically composed--
ready to be transferred on the morrow from the polished plate of
fancy.  I believe it attracted some notice, was thought "graceful"
and was said to be by some one else.  I had to be pointed without
being lively, and it took some tact.  But what I said was much less
interesting than what I thought--especially during the half-hour I
spent in my armchair by the fire, smoking the cigar I always light
before going to bed.  I went to sleep there, I believe; but I
continued to moralise about Greville Fane.  I am reluctant to lose
that retrospect altogether, and this is a dim little memory of it, a
document not to "serve."  The dear woman had written a hundred
stories, but none so curious as her own.
When first I knew her she had published half-a-dozen fictions, and I
believe I had also perpetrated a novel.  She was more than a dozen
years older than I, but she was a person who always acknowledged her
relativity.  It was not so very long ago, but in London, amid the big
waves of the present, even a near horizon gets hidden.  I met her at
some dinner and took her down, rather flattered at offering my arm to
a celebrity.  She didn't look like one, with her matronly, mild,
inanimate face, but I supposed her greatness would come out in her
conversation.  I gave it all the opportunities I could, but I was not
disappointed when I found her only a dull, kind woman.  This was why
I liked her--she rested me so from literature.  To myself literature
was an irritation, a torment; but Greville Fane slumbered in the
intellectual part of it like a Creole in a hammock.  She was not a
woman of genius, but her faculty was so special, so much a gift out
of hand, that I have often wondered why she fell below that
distinction.  This was doubtless because the transaction, in her
case, had remained incomplete; genius always pays for the gift, feels
the debt, and she was placidly unconscious of obligation.  She could
invent stories by the yard, but she couldn't write a page of English.
She went down to her grave without suspecting that though she had
contributed volumes to the diversion of her contemporaries she had
not contributed a sentence to the language.  This had not prevented
bushels of criticism from being heaped upon her head; she was worth a
couple of columns any day to the weekly papers, in which it was shown
that her pictures of life were dreadful but her style really
charming.  She asked me to come and see her, and I went.  She lived
then in Montpellier Square; which helped me to see how dissociated
her imagination was from her character.
An industrious widow, devoted to her daily stint, to meeting the
butcher and baker and making a home for her son and daughter, from
the moment she took her pen in her hand she became a creature of
passion.  She thought the English novel deplorably wanting in that
element, and the task she had cut out for herself was to supply the
deficiency.  Passion in high life was the general formula of this
work, for her imagination was at home only in the most exalted
circles.  She adored, in truth, the aristocracy, and they constituted
for her the romance of the world or, what is more to the point, the
prime material of fiction.  Their beauty and luxury, their loves and
revenges, their temptations and surrenders, their immoralities and
diamonds were as familiar to her as the blots on her writing-table.
She was not a belated producer of the old fashionable novel, she had
a cleverness and a modernness of her own, she had freshened up the
fly-blown tinsel.  She turned off plots by the hundred and--so far as
her flying quill could convey her--was perpetually going abroad.  Her
types, her illustrations, her tone were nothing if not cosmopolitan.
She recognised nothing less provincial than European society, and her
fine folk knew each other and made love to each other from Doncaster
to Bucharest.  She had an idea that she resembled Balzac, and her
favourite historical characters were Lucien de Rubempre and the
Vidame de Pamiers.  I must add that when I once asked her who the
latter personage was she was unable to tell me.  She was very brave
and healthy and cheerful, very abundant and innocent and wicked.  She
was clever and vulgar and snobbish, and never so intensely British as
when she was particularly foreign.
This combination of qualities had brought her early success, and I
remember having heard with wonder and envy of what she "got," in
those days, for a novel.  The revelation gave me a pang:  it was such
a proof that, practising a totally different style, I should never
make my fortune.  And yet when, as I knew her better she told me her
real tariff and I saw how rumour had quadrupled it, I liked her
enough to be sorry.  After a while I discovered too that if she got
less it was not that _I_ was to get any more.  My failure never had
what Mrs. Stormer would have called the banality of being relative--
it was always admirably absolute.  She lived at ease however in those
days--ease is exactly the word, though she produced three novels a
year.  She scorned me when I spoke of difficulty--it was the only
thing that made her angry.  If I hinted that a work of art required a
tremendous licking into shape she thought it a pretension and a pose.
She never recognised the "torment of form"; the furthest she went was
to introduce into one of her books (in satire her hand was heavy) a
young poet who was always talking about it.  I couldn't quite
understand her irritation on this score, for she had nothing at stake
in the matter.  She had a shrewd perception that form, in prose at
least, never recommended any one to the public we were condemned to
address, and therefore she lost nothing (putting her private
humiliation aside) by not having any.  She made no pretence of
producing works of art, but had comfortable tea-drinking hours in
which she freely confessed herself a common pastrycook, dealing in
such tarts and puddings as would bring customers to the shop.  She
put in plenty of sugar and of cochineal, or whatever it is that gives
these articles a rich and attractive colour.  She had a serene
superiority to observation and opportunity which constituted an
inexpugnable strength and would enable her to go on indefinitely.  It
is only real success that wanes, it is only solid things that melt.
Greville Fane's ignorance of life was a resource still more unfailing
than the most approved receipt.  On her saying once that the day
would come when she should have written herself out I answered:  "Ah,
you look into fairyland, and the fairies love you, and THEY never
change.  Fairyland is always there; it always was from the beginning
of time, and it always will be to the end.  They've given you the key
and you can always open the door.  With me it's different; I try, in
my clumsy way, to be in some direct relation to life."  "Oh, bother
your direct relation to life!" she used to reply, for she was always
annoyed by the phrase--which would not in the least prevent her from
using it when she wished to try for style.  With no more prejudices
than an old sausage-mill, she would give forth again with patient
punctuality any poor verbal scrap that had been dropped into her.  I
cheered her with saying that the dark day, at the end, would be for
the like of ME; inasmuch as, going in our small way by experience and
observation, we depended not on a revelation, but on a little
tiresome process.  Observation depended on opportunity, and where
should we be when opportunity failed?
One day she told me that as the novelist's life was so delightful and
during the good years at least such a comfortable support (she had
these staggering optimisms) she meant to train up her boy to follow
it.  She took the ingenious view that it was a profession like
another and that therefore everything was to be gained by beginning
young and serving an apprenticeship.  Moreover the education would be
less expensive than any other special course, inasmuch as she could
administer it herself.  She didn't profess to keep a school, but she
could at least teach her own child.  It was not that she was so very
clever, but (she confessed to me as if she were afraid I would laugh
at her) that HE was.  I didn't laugh at her for that, for I thought
the boy sharp--I had seen him at sundry times.  He was well grown and
good-looking and unabashed, and both he and his sister made me wonder
about their defunct papa, concerning whom the little I knew was that
he had been a clergyman.  I explained them to myself by suppositions
and imputations possibly unjust to the departed; so little were they-
-superficially at least--the children of their mother.  There used to
be, on an easel in her drawing-room, an enlarged photograph of her
husband, done by some horrible posthumous "process" and draped, as to
its florid frame, with a silken scarf, which testified to the candour
of Greville Fane's bad taste.  It made him look like an unsuccessful
tragedian; but it was not a thing to trust.  He may have been a
successful comedian.  Of the two children the girl was the elder, and
struck me in all her younger years as singularly colourless.  She was
only very long, like an undecipherable letter.  It was not till Mrs.
Stormer came back from a protracted residence abroad that Ethel
(which was this young lady's name) began to produce the effect, which
was afterwards remarkable in her, of a certain kind of high
resolution.  She made one apprehend that she meant to do something
for herself.  She was long-necked and near-sighted and striking, and
I thought I had never seen sweet seventeen in a form so hard and high
and dry.  She was cold and affected and ambitious, and she carried an
eyeglass with a long handle, which she put up whenever she wanted not
to see.  She had come out, as the phrase is, immensely; and yet I
felt as if she were surrounded with a spiked iron railing.  What she
meant to do for herself was to marry, and it was the only thing, I
think, that she meant to do for any one else; yet who would be
inspired to clamber over that bristling barrier?  What flower of
tenderness or of intimacy would such an adventurer conceive as his
reward?
This was for Sir Baldwin Luard to say; but he naturally never
confided to me the secret.  He was a joyless, jokeless young man,
with the air of having other secrets as well, and a determination to
get on politically that was indicated by his never having been known
to commit himself--as regards any proposition whatever--beyond an
exclamatory "Oh!"  His wife and he must have conversed mainly in prim
ejaculations, but they understood sufficiently that they were kindred
spirits.  I remember being angry with Greville Fane when she
announced these nuptials to me as magnificent; I remember asking her
what splendour there was in the union of the daughter of a woman of
genius with an irredeemable mediocrity.  "Oh! he's awfully clever,"
she said; but she blushed for the maternal fib.  What she meant was
that though Sir Baldwin's estates were not vast (he had a dreary
house in South Kensington and a still drearier "Hall" somewhere in
Essex, which was let), the connection was a "smarter" one than a
child of hers could have aspired to form.  In spite of the social
bravery of her novels she took a very humble and dingy view of
herself, so that of all her productions "my daughter Lady Luard" was
quite the one she was proudest of.  That personage thought her mother
very vulgar and was distressed and perplexed by the occasional
license of her pen, but had a complicated attitude in regard to this
indirect connection with literature.  So far as it was lucrative her
ladyship approved of it, and could compound with the inferiority of
the pursuit by doing practical justice to some of its advantages.  I
had reason to know (my reason was simply that poor Mrs. Stormer told
me) that she suffered the inky fingers to press an occasional bank-
note into her palm.  On the other hand she deplored the "peculiar
style" to which Greville Fane had devoted herself, and wondered where
an author who had the convenience of so lady-like a daughter could
have picked up such views about the best society.  "She might know
better, with Leolin and me," Lady Luard had been known to remark; but
it appeared that some of Greville Fane's superstitions were
incurable.  She didn't live in Lady Luard's society, and the best was
not good enough for her--she must make it still better.
I could see that this necessity grew upon her during the years she
spent abroad, when I had glimpses of her in the shifting sojourns
that lay in the path of my annual ramble.  She betook herself from
Germany to Switzerland and from Switzerland to Italy; she favoured
cheap places and set up her desk in the smaller capitals.  I took a
look at her whenever I could, and I always asked how Leolin was
getting on.  She gave me beautiful accounts of him, and whenever it
was possible the boy was produced for my edification.  I had entered
from the first into the joke of his career--I pretended to regard him
as a consecrated child.  It had been a joke for Mrs. Stormer at
first, but the boy himself had been shrewd enough to make the matter
serious.  If his mother accepted the principle that the intending
novelist cannot begin too early to see life, Leolin was not
interested in hanging back from the application of it.  He was eager
to qualify himself, and took to cigarettes at ten, on the highest
literary grounds.  His poor mother gazed at him with extravagant envy
and, like Desdemona, wished heaven had made HER such a man.  She
explained to me more than once that in her profession she had found
her sex a dreadful drawback.  She loved the story of Madame George
Sand's early rebellion against this hindrance, and believed that if
she had worn trousers she could have written as well as that lady.
Leolin had for the career at least the qualification of trousers, and
as he grew older he recognised its importance by laying in an immense
assortment.  He grew up in gorgeous apparel, which was his way of
interpreting his mother's system.  Whenever I met her I found her
still under the impression that she was carrying this system out and
that Leolin's training was bearing fruit.  She was giving him
experience, she was giving him impressions, she was putting a
gagnepain into his hand.  It was another name for spoiling him with
the best conscience in the world.  The queerest pictures come back to
me of this period of the good lady's life and of the extraordinarily
virtuous, muddled, bewildering tenor of it.  She had an idea that she
was seeing foreign manners as well as her petticoats would allow;
but, in reality she was not seeing anything, least of all fortunately
how much she was laughed at.  She drove her whimsical pen at Dresden
and at Florence, and produced in all places and at all times the same
romantic and ridiculous fictions.  She carried about her box of
properties and fished out promptly the familiar, tarnished old
puppets.  She believed in them when others couldn't, and as they were
like nothing that was to be seen under the sun it was impossible to
prove by comparison that they were wrong.  You can't compare birds
and fishes; you could only feel that, as Greville Fane's characters
had the fine plumage of the former species, human beings must be of
the latter.
It would have been droll if it had not been so exemplary to see her
tracing the loves of the duchesses beside the innocent cribs of her
children.  The immoral and the maternal lived together in her
diligent days on the most comfortable terms, and she stopped curling
the mustaches of her Guardsmen to pat the heads of her babes.  She
was haunted by solemn spinsters who came to tea from continental
pensions, and by unsophisticated Americans who told her she was just
loved in THEIR country.  "I had rather be just paid there," she
usually replied; for this tribute of transatlantic opinion was the
only thing that galled her.  The Americans went away thinking her
coarse; though as the author of so many beautiful love-stories she
was disappointing to most of these pilgrims, who had not expected to
find a shy, stout, ruddy lady in a cap like a crumbled pyramid.  She
wrote about the affections and the impossibility of controlling them,
but she talked of the price of pension and the convenience of an
English chemist.  She devoted much thought and many thousands of
francs to the education of her daughter, who spent three years at a
very superior school at Dresden, receiving wonderful instruction in
sciences, arts and tongues, and who, taking a different line from
Leolin, was to be brought up wholly as a femme du monde.  The girl
was musical and philological; she made a specialty of languages and
learned enough about them to be inspired with a great contempt for
her mother's artless accents.  Greville Fane's French and Italian
were droll; the imitative faculty had been denied her, and she had an
unequalled gift, especially pen in hand, of squeezing big mistakes
into small opportunities.  She knew it, but she didn't care;
correctness was the virtue in the world that, like her heroes and
heroines, she valued least.  Ethel, who had perceived in her pages
some remarkable lapses, undertook at one time to revise her proofs;
but I remember her telling me a year after the girl had left school
that this function had been very briefly exercised.  "She can't read
me," said Mrs. Stormer; "I offend her taste.  She tells me that at
Dresden--at school--I was never allowed."  The good lady seemed
surprised at this, having the best conscience in the world about her
lucubrations.  She had never meant to fly in the face of anything,
and considered that she grovelled before the Rhadamanthus of the
English literary tribunal, the celebrated and awful Young Person.  I
assured her, as a joke, that she was frightfully indecent (she hadn't
in fact that reality any more than any other) my purpose being solely
to prevent her from guessing that her daughter had dropped her not
because she was immoral but because she was vulgar.  I used to figure
her children closeted together and asking each other while they
exchanged a gaze of dismay:  "Why should she BE so--and so FEARFULLY
so--when she has the advantage of our society?  Shouldn't WE have
taught her better?"  Then I imagined their recognising with a blush
