          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to " Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".
*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*
Luther's Little Instruction Book
(The Small Catechism of Martin Luther)
Translation by Robert E. Smith
May 22, 1994
Version 1.1 -- December 22, 1994
PW# 001-003-002Ea
I.
The Ten Commandments: The Simple Way a Father Should Present
Them to His Household
A.  The First Commandment
You must not have other gods.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear, love, and trust God more than anything else.
B.  The Second Commandment
You must not misuse your God's name.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will not use His name
to curse, swear, cast a spell, lie or deceive, but will use it to
call upon Him, pray to Him, praise Him and thank Him in all times
of trouble.
C.  The Third Commandment
You must keep the Sabbath holy.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will not look down on
preaching or God's Word, but consider it holy, listen to it
willingly, and learn it.
D.  The Fourth Commandment
You must honor your father and mother. [So that things will go
well for you and you will live long on earth].
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will neither look down
on our parents or superiors nor irritate them, but will honor
them, serve them, obey them, love them and value them.
E.  The Fifth Commandment
You must not kill.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will neither harm nor
hurt our neighbor's body, but help him and care for him when he is
ill.
F.  The Sixth Commandment
You must not commit adultery.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that our words and actions
will be clean and decent and so that everyone will love and honor
their spouses.
G.  The Seventh Commandment
You must not steal.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will neither take our
neighbor's money or property, nor acquire it by fraud or by
selling him poorly made products, but will help him improve and
protect his property and career.
H.  The Eighth Commandment
You must not tell lies about your neighbor.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will not deceive by
lying, betraying, slandering or ruining our neighbor's reputation,
but will defend him, say good things about him, and see the best
side of everything he does.
I.  The Ninth Commandment
You must not desire your neighbor's house.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will not attempt to
trick our neighbor out of his inheritance or house, take it by
pretending to have a right to it, etc. but help him to keep &
improve it.
J.  The Tenth Commandment
You must not desire your neighbor's wife, servant, maid, animals
or anything that belongs to him.
Q. What does this mean?
A. We must fear and love God, so that we will not release his
cattle, take his employees from him or seduce his wife, but urge
they to stay and do what they ought to do.
K.  The Conclusion to the Commandments
Q. What does God say to us about all these commandments?
A. This is what He says:
``I am the Lord Your God. I am a jealous God. I plague the
grandchildren and great-grandchildren of those who hate me with
their ancestor's sin. But I make whole those who love me for a
thousand generations.''
Q. What does it mean?
A. God threatens to punish everyone who breaks these commandments.
We should be afraid of His anger because of this and not violate
such commandments. But He promises grace and all good things to
those who keep such commandments. Because of this, we, too, should
love Him, trust Him, and willingly do what His commandments
require.
Part Two: The Creed
The Creed: The Simple Way a Father Should Present it to His Household
I.  The First Article: On Creation
I believe in God the Almighty Father, Creator of Heaven and Earth.
Q. What does this mean?
A. I believe that God created me, along with all creatures. He gave to
   me: body and soul, eyes, ears and all the other parts of my body,
   my mind and all my senses and preserves them as well. He gives me
   clothing and shoes, food and drink, house and land, wife and
   children, fields, animals and all I own. Every day He abundantly
   provides everything I need to nourish this body and life. He
   protects me against all danger, shields and defends me from all
   evil.  He does all this because of His pure, fatherly and divine
